The mechanisms of today’s reality – seen as an objective process anchored in global market
opening and supported by the achievements of science and technology – are limiting the
corporate horizon of development due to the increasing environmental problems, the
scarceness of low-entropy resources and the profound changes in social morphology.
Focusing on the typical outcome of industrialism, yet constrained by the need to use the
limited resources effectively and to win over the tough competition, corporate activities
have dangerously accelerated the entropic degradation and have become a factor of global
imbalance. The inherent imbalances thus accumulated, the distortions brought about by this
concept of economic performance, the serious contradictions between them and the
arguments regarding the welfare of the society have caused the reference system of welfare
economics to expand along ecological and socio-cultural coordinates, while the industrial
paradigm has changed by placing the issue of microeconomics in a more complex
relationship with the macro-environment and with the proximity of the community. In this
context, we need to redefine corporate performance by including the notion of social
responsibility and by developing an assessment and measurement system that would allow
various quantity and quality, time and space comparability for this responsibility. From
Milton Friedman’s theory stating that the corporations’ sole responsibility was to be
profitable under the requirement of complying with the rules, new theories have emerged
and pushed the system of economic performance to the intersection with other systems.
Social responsibility, business ethics, public interest or working environment are notions
required for assessing the sustainable competitive advantage at microeconomic level.
The stage in which corporations, in order to assess their identity, under the pressure of the
insufficiencies typical of the system, defined themselves as distinct bodies of the society –
having their own mission, philosophy, culture and policies – has been followed by a stage
of global structural changes meant to connect them to the simple values of the community,
society and even humanity as a requirement for their survival and development through the
sustainable competitive advantage. The active and aware public has reached the opinion
that it needs a commitment to social responsibility and that corporations should amplify that
commitment as a requirement for their sustainable development and survival. The
corporations’ competitive strategies should include – apart from specific goals such as
market share, product differentiation or smart promotion – the goal of harmonizing
stakeholder expectations. In this context, the commitment to social responsibility becomes
an important pillar in gaining the partners’ and the public’s confidence, along with a
recognition that would strengthen the company’s market position and its commitment to a
competitive sustainable approach.
In this approach, the authors propose to:
• structure the referential of the theoretical accumulation in which social responsibility
is approached;
• define the system of stakeholders in which the social responsibility, as a complex,
versatile variable, consists of a set of actions witch optimize the corporation’s response to
diverse and conflicting requirements;
• describes the interference of social responsibility, as a result of causes that lie in
different interests, with the system of economic performance;

competitiveness, considering that it depends largely on the competitive ability of the
economic entities owned.
The authors hope that by setting up a general framework of the social responsibility they
establish the coordinates needed for a good evaluation in a research program on regional
competitiveness.
1. Considerations of social responsibility
A series of theoretical and practical researches have emphasized the need for a new
paradigm that might guide the economic research and analysis, thus redefining corporate
performance and competitiveness by including the concept of social responsibility. Here are
a few of these advances:
• a systemic approach of the economic environment as an element of the macroenvironment interacting with the whole and with each of its components; interdependencies
are relevant and the whole is greater than all subsystems. By applying the general theory of
systems we have the instrument we need to understand complex non-linear systems (people
being one of them) where elements interact in a holistic manner and where reverse
connections are multiple, their reverberations being hard to explain by mathematical or
logical relationships. Resisting to the pressure of many external influences, such systems
modify their behaviour under the action of certain highly impacting parameters. The
complex interaction between the reverse connection loops and the non-linear relations leads
to major mutations (Demetrescu, 1983, p.19). As a basis of the systemic approach,
dialectics reveals that the contraries present within every system and the power of
accumulation turn quality transformations into a perpetual becoming. The basis of
knowledge is limited neither to the whole nor to the individual parts. The “closed system”
or circular flow approach of the economic system, which saw it as anchored in its own
limited paradigm of profitability, helped us to timely notice the accelerated process of
“transformation of low entropies into high entropies, i.e. non-recoverable waste or pollution
(the entropic process of the economic environment is human dependent, as man has the
discernment to choose and thus introduce the impact parameters into the entropic process)”
(Georgescu-Roegen, 1971, p.457); moreover, this approach helped us to assess the impact
of externalized costs on the economic output. The consequences of this attitude on the
environment compel us to approach the economic environment in a systemic way, by
taking into account its multiple interdependencies with the macro-environment and its
complex holonic interactions;
• the concept of sustainable development has been adopted as a basis for planning and
leading our way of life in a universal sense, in the present and in the future (Declaration on
Environment and Development, 1992) and our whole set of socio-economic activities is
now evaluated from a sustainable point of view.
The fundamental goal of the European Union is sustainable development, which consists in
maintaining the planet’s capacity to support life in all its various forms, and which requires:
- economic prosperity based on ensuring the long-term competitive advantage,
viability and prosperity of the economic operators and communities they belong to, but also
on increasing the quality of labor by providing proper payment and working conditions;
coexist with the corporations, by getting them involved in activity planning and
management in order to capitalize on all the opportunities, by protecting the communities’
traditions and specificity and by joining the community forces with the corporations’ own
force;
- protection of the natural and cultural environment by minimizing pollution, global
and local degradation of the environment, by cutting down the use of rare resources, by
maintaining and amplifying the cultural heritage and local biodiversity and contributing to
their appreciation and conservation.
The pillars of sustainable development are at the same a reference system for corporate
social responsibility, which is considered to be a component of the new economic
paradigm;
• the impact range of the corporation's activity has been widened to include the
concept of stakeholders and it has become the object of exhaustive research. Stakeholders
are the individuals, groups or organizations that are directly or indirectly affected by the
actions, goals and policies of the corporation. This concept was built on the idea that
companies unfold their activity in areas regulated by the authorities, engaging in complex
relationships with a series of co-interested partners, and that the products or services they
create are necessary for consumers who are concerned about obtaining them. Thus, apart
from the equity investors (who are interested in the status and growth of the investment, as
well as in their ability to generate the forecast earnings), stakeholders have come to
legitimately include the employees (who are interested in workplace stability, wages level,
possibility to have good working conditions), the creditors (who are interested in the
viability and profitability of the projects they grant loans for, in reimbursement at maturity
and in obtaining the adequate income), the suppliers (who are interested in the maturity
payment of the deliveries and in the future of the partnership, especially if their own
strategies include this type of relationship), the consumers (who are interested in obtaining
the respective products or services, especially when they have an important weight in
individual consumption), the authorities (who are interested in assigning the resources,
charging the due taxes and having a real basis for preparing the local or state budgets) and
the communities (who are interested in the creation of jobs, local inter-corporate relations
and prosperity). M. Porter’s value chain and the upstream/downstream concatenation of
activities with the suppliers’/distributors’ chains have underlined even more their
importance in mutually achieving the corporate performance objectives. It is believed that,
consistently with social responsibility, corporate management should empathize with
stakeholders, its duty being that of improving stakeholder satisfaction;
• strategic management instruments have been created to support long-term corporate
development consistently with the major tendencies of the society. By rigorously analyzing
the typical strengths and weaknesses of corporations in conjunction with the constraints and
opportunities of the environment, and by detailing the success factors in accordance with
the individuality of each corporation, we may determine which future strategies would
ensure the perenniality, and growing richness of that corporation. The constraining force of
external or internal stakeholders and the incongruence of their expectations have driven
corporations to include the goal of increasing their satisfaction into their strategies, as a
requirement for preserving their competitive capacity on the long term. At the same time,
by increasing stakeholder satisfaction the corporation becomes more closely linked to the
members of society by including the corporation into its redistribution mechanisms for the
incidence area and by reinforcing the cohesion between them, with beneficial effects on
sustainable development. Data have proved that profitability is insufficient for long-term
development, as the strategies should ensure:
- an internal environment favourable to maintaining the competitive level and
corporate development, achieved by improving work conditions and the quality of life;
- a favourable external environment by getting the corporation involved in actions
meant to improve the welfare of the reference communities, by developing a local and
regional partnership system in order to create a stimulating business environment rooted in
the congruence of common goals, and by increasing the holonic competitiveness as an
essential quality requirement for a sustainable development of the various components;
• other accumulations whose impact has helped corporations commit to social
responsibility as a factor of sustainable competitiveness: marketing studies (especially those
on consumer behaviour), a wide range of associative movements, the extension of areas
covered by the law and the development of supervision organisations committed to
environmental preservation, consumer protection and community prosperity.
The multiple facets and manifestations of corporate social responsibility have led to a
variety of definitions, some of which are mentioned in an article of the Institute for Public
Relations:
• “a commitment to improve community well-being through discretionary business
practices and contributions of corporate resources” (Kotler and Lee - 2005);
• “the process though which managers in an organization think and discuss their
relations with the stakeholders, as well as their roles regarding the common good” (Basu
and Palazzo - 2008);
• “the continuous commitment by businesses to behaving ethically and contributing to
economic development while improving the quality of life of the workforce as well as of
the community” (Watts and Holme, 1999 quoted in Sims, 2003);
• “corporate social responsibility includes behaviours and actions that go beyond the
simple creation of profit and which are meant to improve the social condition of individuals
within that society” (Mahon and McGowan - 1991);
• “Bourdieu's concept of social capital (1986) offers a constructive approach to the
elements of power in the relationship between an organisation and the co-interested groups
that its success or failure depend on. Whether instrumental, symbolic or purely rational, the
quality of each relationship is based on an entity's desire for another entity to continue
operating in the same way”. (Ihlen - 2005);
• “doing well by doing good”. Practically, organisations which embrace social
responsibility practices become preferred employers, distinctive neighbours in the
community and distinctive sellers. The true challenge for organisations is to acknowledge
the responsibilities beyond their strictly financial obligations (Rawlins - Introduction to
Corporate Social Responsibility from the Encyclopedia of Public Relations - 2005).

European Union and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development have
become involved in defining it as “a conception referring to the contribution which
companies are indebted to bring to the development of the modern society”, in preparing
assessment standards for the “desirable corporate behaviour” and in creating a system of
indicators that might enable a transparent evaluation of this responsibility. In order to
achieve a sustainable development, several United Nations agencies, companies, trade
union organisations, business organisations, academic organisations, civil society
organisations and various institutions have initiated a partnership within the Global
Compact program. As part of their endeavour to coordinate corporate activity in consensus
with sustainable development and committed social responsibility, the international bodies
have prepared several sets of guiding principles for their activity. They are structured
according to the following essential themes (table no. 1):
Table no. 1: Key themes and principles in organizing the activities
UNO
HUMAN
RIGHTS

LABOUR
STANDARDS

ENVIRONMENT

supporting and
respecting human
rights; ensuring they
are not accomplices to
the infringement of
human rights;
supporting the right to
free association;
contributing to
eliminating all forms of
forced labour;
contributing to
eradicating the
phenomenon of child
labour;
contributing to
eliminating
discrimination in job
placement and the
performance of one’s
profession;
taking an anticipatory
approach of
environmental issues;
promoting
environmental
responsibility;
encouraging the
development and
spreading of
technologies that do
not degrade the
environment

Vol. XIII • No. 29 • February 2011

EUROPEAN UNION
OECD
observing the human
respecting human rights in
rights stipulated in the
all the activities they
1948 Universal
perform;
Declaration of Human
Rights;
ensuring the
improvement of the
employees’ quality of
life, both in and out of
the workplace;
ensuring a safe and
healthy working
environment; taking a
responsible approach to
restructuring in times
of crisis and taking into
account the interests of
all the parties involved;

supporting and applying fair
principles and practices in
company management;
promoting the company
values among the employees
by means of training
programs;
not discriminating and not
sanctioning those
individuals or institutions
that warn the management
team about unfair company
practices;

minimizing the impact
of their activities on the
environment and
natural resources;

contributing to the
economic, social and
environmental development
by supporting the principle
of sustainable development;

protecting and
encouraging
environment protection
INTERESTS

Corporate Social Responsibility and the Sustainable Competitive Advantage
combating any form of
corruption, including
bribery and blackmail.

never accepting exemptions
that are not included in the
local legislative framework
on the environment, health,
safety, labour and taxation;
not getting involved in local
political activities without a
justified reason;
supporting the
encouraging the
development of the
development of local
communities in which communities;
they perform their
developing and applying
activity; supporting the efficient management
development of local
systems in order to build a
economic systems by
trustful relationship with the
making partnerships
societies they operate in;
with the indigenous
encouraging their business
distributors.
partners to apply the OECD
Guidelines.

As a sociological concept, social responsibility is defined as acceptance and/or correction of
the (moral, social, legal, financial etc) consequences of the actions conceived and
performed by an individual or a group, in this case by corporations. In modern societies,
which are characterized by organic social differentiation and solidarity, the accent falls on
cooperation - which supposes autonomy of the parts and a moral of respect as basis for
subjective (intentional) responsibility (Zamfir and Vlăsceanu, 1993, p.512).
Viewed from the social role attributed to the corporation, social responsibility is assessed as
a behavioural model associated to a certain social position or socio-economic status. At
corporate level, we may assert that the socio-economic status depends on size, on the level
of resources attracted (the human resource playing a primary role in intra-community
assessments), on the generated outcome and the yield of that outcome, on the market
position, on the degree of globalization and the desire to globalize, on the power of
intervention in elaborating policies and regulations for its scope of activity - and for other
aspects as well - on local, national and global level, on the social prestige it enjoys and, last
but not least, on the corporation’s power to change its status. Socio-economic status is
characterised by normative prescriptions and by effective behaviours that can be more or
less in harmony with each other. The greater the corporation’s size, market position, power
to persuade, power to lay pressure and area of incidence, the larger and more heterogeneous
the reference society will be, the larger and more diverse its expectations, the more frequent
and harmful the implications of any infringement.
We may therefore conclude (in this approach that does not intend to make a detailed
sociological analysis, but only to propose an adequate frame for evaluation) that the social
role is represented by a set of behaviours that society legitimately expects from any
corporation to embrace in accordance to its socio-economic status, and that corporate social
responsibility circumscribes the whole set of its obligations to the stakeholders (as defined
above) within a certain reference system. (Figure no. 1)


Community
Creditors, suppliers, State
k h ld
h
shareholders
h h ld

-

employees

-

consumers

-

information, fair treatment;
product quality and safety;
services and guarantees.

-

-

business development;
richness maximization;
expected return on
capital.

-

environment protection:
controlling air, water and
pollution by material waste;
preserving energy and other
material resources;
ameliorating the visual,
olfactory and sonorous
pollution;
urban development;
support for education and the
arts;
cooperation with the local
administration.

timely settlement of obligations;
margin increase on the aggregated value chain, both
horizontally and vertically;
taking part in preparing the improvement regulations.

good working and payment conditions;
job security;
the right to an opinion;
the possibility to improve;
perspective.

Figure no. 1: The system of stakeholders and their expectations
Social responsibility has a strong intentional (subjective) nature, generated by the parties’
relative autonomy; the discretionary component of benevolence has a significant weight in
this respect.
Although in its current acceptation social responsibility includes voluntary commitments
other than those arising from contracts or imposed by law, we believe that the latter also
include a major subjective component, at least in the way they are achieved. The
elaboration of ever more harsh and restrictive norms in the fields of environment, consumer
protection and treatment of the employees is itself a consequence of the corporations failure
to subjectively undertake these responsibilities by eluding or treating them superficially.
(Figure no. 2)
The impact area above includes all the individuals, groups or organizations affected by the
corporation’s activity. The area of concrete committed obligations whose infringement is
punishable is usually excluded from the area of social responsibility; however, we must
notice that social responsibility can manifest itself in this space at least in the shape of
business ethics. As for contractual obligations, share capital holders are normally
differentiated from the other stakeholders - creditors, suppliers, employees and distributors
- towards whom the corporation has certain obligations as stipulated in a well-defined
framework. We cannot speak of social responsibility solely in the context of those groups

contractual obligations leads to widespread social repercussions that have a multiplying
effect and that affect large social groups - the corporation's own employees and those of its
contractual partners, their families, the beneficiaries of the whole link chain etc.
The area of social
The area of corporate
The area of committed
Figure no. 2: The area of corporate impact and that of social responsibility
Ideally, we might consider that stakeholders form a group that is characterised by a certain
syntality, which generates synergies capable of maintaining its cohesion and contribute to
the achievement of its goals. However, in reality this group is made up of members that
have different, even divergent expectations, who may get involved in conflicts of interests
within the group or among different groups. The only coherence of the suppliers’ group is
the expectation to receive payment for their deliveries, each member of the group wishing
to recover the amounts due in the shortest time possible. Clients may want to have their
requests granted as quickly as possible and to postpone the payment deadline, some of them
to the detriment of the others. The plurality of groups that make up society, including intracorporate groups, has lead to a plurality of expectations whose legitimacy embraces various
degrees of validity. In fact, each group may attribute a certain social role to a corporation
according to its own interests.
The lack of congruence among the stakeholders’ expectations generates a difficult situation
and requires a different synectic approach for every alternative chosen by the corporation.
Nevertheless, there is consensus regarding the congruence of legitimate expectations from
the corporation:
• a space of full congruence regarding the group’s expectations from the corporation,
namely about:
- creation of the product or service portfolio;
- economic growth;
- creation of jobs;
• a space of congruence for most of the expectations, which is also related to the
standards prepared by international bodies and which includes:
- respect for the fundamental human rights;
- environment protection;
- respect for the labour standards;
- fair treatment for the consumers;
• a space of partial congruence and of divergences, such as:
- community interests;
- the fight against corruption;
• a space of manifest divergences, for instance the dividend policy.
requires a rigorous analysis thereof in order to determine the priorities. This analysis has the
following stages (figure no. 3):
Making an
inventory of all
the stakeholders

Determining the
position toward
the corporation

Making an
inventory of
the interests

Determining
the priorities

Figure no. 3: Stages in the analysis of priorities
We may use the strategic analysis matrix in order to determine interest satisfaction
priorities (figure no. 4):
power

high

I.

III.

High power, low interest High power, high
stakeholders
interest, stakeholders

average
II.

IV.

Low power, low interest Low power, high
stakeholders
interest
stakeholders

low

interests

low

average

high

Figure no. 4: Using matrix strategic analysis in setting priorities to meet the interests
Post-modern approaches see the corporation as an open system in which relationships are
treated from the outside inward, meaning that policies adapt in order to harmonize
incongruences and optimize stakeholder satisfaction. To this purpose, corporate governance
- a network of rules and policies that the management uses to ensure responsibility, fairness
and transparency in its relations with the stakeholders - includes explicit and implicit
contracts providing for the stakeholders’ responsibilities, rights and rewards, dispute
settlement procedures according to their obligations, privileges and roles, as well as for
supervision and control procedures. Thus, corporate governance acquires the role of
harmonising the corporation goals and actions with those of its reference environment, as a
requirement for its sustainable development.
Since the economic system is included in the social system, we may conclude that the
system of corporate social performances includes the economic performance as well, as a
prime obligation usually toward the investors in the third quadrant.
Consequently, the level and sustainability of the social performance is determined by the
economic performance. In the absence of the economic performance, corporations would

at the first stage (figure no. 5), thus affecting their competitive position.
The figure below shows how, while leading to a certain decrease of the economic
performance and possibly of the short-term competitive advantage, social responsibility
ensures the companies’ sustainability on the long term.
Obligations
arising from
the legislation

Interests of the
capital
investors

Interests arising
from
management /
contracting
agreements

Negative
impact
Non-ethical
practices
leading to the
failure to
protect the
environment,
delay in the
settlement of
contractual
obligations,
bad working
conditions etc.

Authorities
Creditors
Consumers
increase in the
short-term
economic
performance

Interests arising
from work
contracts

Interests arising
from loan
agreements

Communities

Employees

decrease in the
long-term
economic
performance

Corporation

SOCIAL
RESPONSIB
ILITY

Positive
impact

Management
Investors
increase in the
long-term
economic
performance

Negative
impact
Interests arising
from
commercial
agreements

loss of partners,
penalties, high
mobility of the
workforce,
decrease in
sales

Education and
professional
training
programs
Additional
environment
protection
programs

Employees
Decrease in the
short-term
economic
performance

Consumers
Authorities

Fighting
poverty within
the community

increase in
productivity,
consumption
and sales

Communities

Positive
impact

Figure no.5: Influence of the commitment to social responsibility on the economic
performance

generated by producer PpVpP2, which together form the social surplus P1VpP2, we may
distinguish among various types of actions:
• actions that lead to additional costs (i.e.: charities such as the soup kitchen) and
reduce the producer’s surplus;
• actions that are recovered through pricing and that reduce the consumer’s surplus
(i.e.: paid biodegradable packaging);
• actions that affect both the consumer’s and the producer’s surplus; in this case, the
induced costs cannot be entirely recovered through pricing (i.e.: professional training of
groups that include members of the reference community apart from the company’s own
employees).
Δ P1VpPp
= the
consumer’s
surplus

P
1
P
pi

The offer

Δ P1VpP2 = social
surplus

V
The demand
Δ PpVpP2
= the
producer’s
surplus

P
O

Qp
OPpVpQp = cost
of the consumer’s
opportunity

OPpVpQp = cost of
the producer’s
opportunity

Figure no. 6: The social surplus
The use of funds for supporting activities related to charity, environment protection or
rehabilitation, patronage etc. accompanied by a reduction of the profit has negative
implications on the social surplus and therefore on the amount that the producer, consumer
or both might use for development purposes or for other goals perceived to be more
effective, including at society level, because such alternatives would add more value. For
this reason, the manner in which corporations choose to commit to social responsibility is
very important. If the social surplus can be used for other economic goals that society needs
and that can generate higher performances, we may confidently state that future flows will
be able to ensure greater satisfactions for all the stakeholders, otherwise the surplus would
be wasted. Companies need to consider these aspects when including the amounts they use
for social purposes into their opportunity costs.

priorities - as detailed above - and on the assessment of social efficiency expressed as the
relation between effectiveness (which measures the satisfaction degree of a certain need)
and costs. If the company misses the opportunity to use the available economic funds for
achieving a highly profitable financial goal because the insufficiency of such funds has led
to delays, then postponing the planned benevolent actions is interpreted as postponing a
smaller present satisfaction in favour of a greater one in the future.
Companies famous for large patronage actions and involvement in significant humanitarian
programs are usually strong companies that enjoy high economic performances, have
reached maturity and foresee a slower rhythm of development in the future.
It is only the dividend money - destined exclusively to the consumption of certain company
members - that can be truly considered to take part in the general welfare when used to the
advantage of the community. The amounts of money included in the organization costs
work against the investors and the other participants (managers and sometimes even the
employees) when the profit is shared. Authorities are at a disadvantage only insofar as such
costs are deductible. The companies’ participation in funding social actions may be
interpreted either as a consequence of insufficient funds in the state/local budget as
compared to the community members’ needs and expectations, as a consequence of the
improper distribution of such funds or as the authorities’ failure to manage those resources.
The problem of taxation, which should cover the legitimate social needs without
discouraging less profitable but absolutely necessary activities, the large discrepancies
between the profitability of different economic sectors and the scale of different businesses,
the policy of encouraging certain areas, the government investments, the dynamics of the
companies, the impossibility to hire people or the reconversion of the entire available
workforce, as well as many other factors may justify to a certain extent the need for social
involvement by the companies. We may consider that a company’s social involvement is
better applied and more focused on the community than the involvement of the authorities,
who must distribute the income to a multitude of goals without ever covering all of them.
In the sense of globalisation, we may notice a development of social responsibility in that
strong companies get involved in solving humanitarian problems for beneficiaries than
cannot be included among the stakeholders - such as aids for the population of the world’s
poorest countries, disaster relief etc.
The international bodies’ standards - meant to guide companies in committing to social
responsibility - cover domains that are largely supported by laws or compulsory norms
which companies are bound to observe to legislative level. Everything companies do in the
area of environment or consumer protection - for instance the introduction of environmentfriendly technologies, ecological foods or packaging - may turn into a competitive advantage
because sooner or later they will become compulsory. Adopting solutions that might
decrease the consumption of energy or other raw materials per unit produced is an action that
follows the aforementioned standards and that, at the same time, reduces costs and ensures a
higher competitive advantage. Scholarly literature abounds in demonstrations of the positive
effect that good working conditions have on productivity and on the employees’
involvement in improving the production processes (Japan’s example of increasing the
quality of its products), which ensures a competitive advantage. We may assert that, by
developing local partnerships with small local producers and even by externalising certain
operations in order to make better use of the workforce in the area, companies will help
by interacting with the respective firms. The social responsibility at corporation level can be
consolidated also by implementing of whistle blowing policies. Speaking about the
Romanian society we can appreciate that "it will evolve no matter if whistle blowing will be
integrated or not in the local economic culture but it has to be admitted that the new
tendencies are already present in our country" (Bunget, O.,2009, p. 49).
We may assess the effect of corporate social responsibility on the competitive advantage by
using various models of strategic analysis. We propose the following models:
1. The sustainable competitive advantage evaluation grid is based on four relevant quality
variables that receive importance coefficients and that we can evaluate based on specific
criteria. The criteria are marked on a scale of 1-5; they receive a partial grade at variable
level and a total number of points on which the global diagnosis is based. (Table no. 2)
Table no. 2: Rating scale sustainable competitiveness
Variable

Importance
coefficient

Performance
on the
market
0.20

Performance
in research
and
development

Economic
and financial
performance

0.3

0.3

Social
performance
0.20

Criterion

Weight of the
criterion

Grades

Market size
Market structure
Placement within the market tendencies
1/5
Competitive position
Competitive advantages
Weighted arithmetic mean - variable
Rhythm of innovations in the sector
Potential for product innovation
Potential for technology innovation

1/4

Level of expenses for research and
development
Weighted arithmetic mean - variable
Sector profitability
Access to resources
1/5
Efficiency of the production
Financial structure
Liquidity
Weighted arithmetic mean - variable
Labour standards and quality of life
Environment-friendly technologies
Improvement of stakeholder satisfaction

1/5

Community interests
Partnerships
Weighted arithmetic mean - variable
Weighted arithmetic mean - sustainable competitive advantage

2. The multi-criteria model for evaluating the sustainable competitive advantage is based on
six criteria whose values range from 1 to 5. The hexagon determined by the maximum
values represents the highest competitive potential against which we may assess the

no. 7)
Economic performance
Technology

Tendencies
of the sector

Flexibilitty

Competitive
position

Social performance

Figure no. 7: Multi-model assessment of sustainable competitiveness
We believe it is possible to approach the efficiency of social responsibility by determining
the derivatives of long-term economic performance (Ep) modifications and the derivatives
of sustainable competitive advantage (SCA) modifications depending on the modification
of the social effort (Se):
• additional increase of the long-term economic performance due to the additional
increase of social efforts:

dEp Ep1 − Ep0
=
dSe Se1 − Se0

(1)

• additional increase of the sustainable competitive advantage due to the additional
increase of social efforts:

dSCA SCA1 − SCA0
=
dSe
Se1 − Se0

(2)

Companies may take certain actions according to the particulars of each different situation
(Demetrescu, 1983, p.153) (table no. 3):
Table no. 3: Elasticity of economic performance according to social work – measures
Elasticity of the economic Elasticity of the competitive advantage depending on
performance depending on the social efforts
the social efforts
Improper fraction
Proper fraction
Positive improper fraction
increase the efforts orient the efforts to high incidence
vectors
Positive proper fraction
maintain the efforts reduce the efforts
Negative
reorient the efforts
reanalyse priorities
We have to mention that this approach is only viable if we apply the reasoning to cases
where we can obtain credible quantifications.

Social responsibility is a relatively new concept, designed as part of the dynamic process
meant to harmonize the stakeholders’ incongruent interests with the corporation’s interests
for the purpose of the common good.
At the same time, social responsibility is a wide concept that circumscribes the economic
responsibility (the basis supporting the other types of responsibility and the construction of
social responsibility as a whole), the legal responsibility, the ethical responsibility and the
philanthropic responsibility.
No crystallized methodology exists that might help us precisely assess the effect of social
responsibility on the corporate activity, given the nature of the random variables involved
in this process, the complexity and non-linearity of relationships that might appear.
The studies in this field have revealed, on the one hand, that consumers display a complex
reaction (not necessarily a favourable one – i.e. followed by a concrete reaction), and on the
other hand that corporate social responsibility helps rise the companies’ prestige and fame,
which implicitly leads to an increase in the sales, protection in times of crisis and therefore
a greater competitive advantage. Even if certain actions may affect economic performance
on the short term, they will eventually lead to an increase in the corporations’ long-term
competitive capacity due to their beneficial effects at society level and to the creation of a
favorable external environment.
Internally, ensuring proper working standards, a favorable climate and a better quality of
life determines a favorable answer that takes the form of greater productivity, better product
quality and reduction of the hidden costs, all of which influence the competitive advantage
of corporations.
As a space meant to harmonise the stakeholders’ incongruent interests, social responsibility
offers a more efficient support for management decisions and helps reducing risks. Social
responsibility must be approached from the point of view of these interests, in accordance
to the power of the key stakeholders; it requires us to find solutions for satisfying the
majority and to build balanced constructions for the future, in a progression that might
ensure cohesion, efficiency and exclusion of the costs generated by the legitimate corrective
reactions of the negatively affected stakeholders.
We may state that social responsibility is the corporations’ response to the requirements of
the environment, in the sense that the companies’ own actions and goals should be linked to
the common interests and major tendencies of the reference environment. It also gives a
competitive advantage to the corporations themselves, helping them ensure a sustainable
development.
The authors believe that in the designed structural and instrumental environment, the
assumption of social responsibility of economic entities and institutions in developing
regions can be evaluated, as a boosting factor of the sustainable competitiveness.
Acknowledgements
The project titled “ANEVCORED - IT Model and Program for Analysing and Assessing
the Competitive Advantage of the Development Regions” (ref. no. 92-078/2008) unfolds as
Education, Research and Youth. The project partnership includes the following
organisations: The Romanian Institute for Economic-Social Research and Polls –
IRECSON (Coordinator), the National Institute of Economics – IEN (Bucharest), The
Bucharest Academy of Economic Studies – ASE (Bucharest), the Romanian Association
for Technology Transfer and Innovation – AROTT (Craiova), the Research Institute for
Analytical Instrumentation – INCDO-INOE2000 (Cluj-Napoca), the National Research and
Development Institute for Welding and Material Testing – ISIM (Timişoara), the "Danube
Delta" National Research and Development Institute – INCDDD (Tulcea), the National
Institute for Research and Development in Electrical Engineering – ICPE (Bucharest), the
Design Institute for Automation – S.C. PA S.A. (Bucharest), ECONOMIX NEWS
(Bucharest).

