Design principles are increasingly being applied by industry specialists in the planning and
manufacturing of products. At this level, the aim is to link the technological possibilities
with the art elements, so as to obtain products with increased utility, distinguishable
through their originality and elegance and which succeed to impress and provoke emotions
in the consumer through their artistic value.
As such, being part of the process by which we are provided with goods and services,
design is an essential component of material culture, aesthetics, and the environment.
Managers have to realize that they can significantly improve their competitive power by
including design in the conceptual activity of their firm.
Contemporary economy adopted design as a factor of progress. Beyond its aesthetic
significance, design has acquired other meanings as well. The whole society has changed
perceptions about what design is and its parameters have changed, in that sense that its
ethical, social and ecological roles became at least as important as the aesthetic one.
Designers have a key role in conservation of resources by making environmentally friendly
products, simplifying their structure and form, increasing the life of the products, recycling
waste objects, all aimed at sustainable development.
Sustainable development seeks long-term reconciliation between industrial production and
consumption needs, on the one hand, and the protection of an environment conducive to
life, on the other hand. This philosophy also marks the transition from corrective remedies
to preventive measures (Pamfilie, Procopie and Bobe, 2010), and durable design
incorporates environmental aspects, but also economic, ethical and social ones.

1. Theoretic basis of the conceptual model
The extent of the contribution that design can offer to a responsible business is the main
objective of a deep theoretical insight based on the analysis and synthesis of research
conducted and published by the authors in recent years. This contribution is strongly
motivated by the following key points identified as basic units of the model (as seen in
Figure 1):
a) The socio-economic environment and the vision of design
Early 21st century is a well-chosen moment to take overview of the current status of design
and to reflect on its future role. Design, in the current modern sense, is a specialty born out
of the problems posed by industrial production, considering the signals coming from
consumers, in a highly competitive, innovative and, as such, risk bearing environment.
Thus, design increasingly meets the current conditions imposed by the socio-economic
development and is connected to present and future economic practice. This causes the
development of the process of looking for new solutions by the manufacturing companies
in order to generate viable answers to questions about the implications of:
• consumer evolution;
• consumer-product-environment relationship,
• social responsibility of the designer,
• responsible use of resources.

of each component and an overall vision of the whole. An organization with its internal and
external environment is a complex system, and the essential role of the manager is to know
how to steer it. The number of parameters, the magnitude and consequences of their
changes involve finding ways to identify significant trends, opportunities and risks.
The conceptual model has four variables as input: consumer, business, resources and
design, each specifically identified in the given socio-economic context:
• consumer: needs, values, aspirations and lifestyle levels;
• business: policies, strategies, objectives, actions;
• resources: human, material, financial and natural.
• design: operational hypostases (democratic design, Design for All, universal design,
dominant design, ecodesign)(Pamfilie and Procopie, 2013).
b) Innovative design generating responsible business
The next unit of the model has at the center the creative process in all its stages, from idea,
concept, and technology to finished product. Innovative design is one of the main keys to
business growth; the real challenge is to conceive not only the best products but also new
business models. Innovation is about introducing invention to economic and social practice,
involving not only technological success, but also economic, industrial, commercial, social
and cultural.
The organization must have a clear vision of the product to be made, and this can be
achieved by means of marketing, innovative design, manufacturing and engineering. This
vision must be based on a clear understanding of the market, its segments and the
opportunities it offers. Creative ideas and innovative solutions prove to be crucial for any
responsible business. Although science and technology are seen as crucial for development
and are essential components of a strategy for innovation, innovation is a new technological
approach, fundamentally based on design.
Also, this view mustn’t be found only in the product conception stage, but throughout the
production to the final stage. At organization level, design teams should focus on
performance and functionality, as tangible attributes of the product, but also on the
intangible attributes, related to symbol and meaning.
Every day, new technologies are more and more present making design processes easier
and smoother. Rethinking and modernization of technologies provide a new form for the
world we live in and support the ability of design to protect the interests of globally
interconnected communities.
One of the most important ingredients of success is customer involvement in the design
process. Consumers can generate ideas and valuable information on future needs and the
ways of meeting them. Because there are many risks regarding the aesthetics of products,
as their success is not guaranteed, companies should test potential customer reaction to the
new product with prototypes.
c) Rethinking the business in the view of sustainable development
The third unit of the conceptual model involves taking into consideration the environmental
issues - practically applying the concept of sustainable design - as a philosophy of
designing and manufacturing products in accordance with the principles of economic,
social and environmental sustainability. Sustainable design involves the use of renewable
materials with minimal impact on the environment and human harmony with nature.
Applying the principles of sustainable design to new products, accepted on the market, can
generate new ideas of environmentally friendly products that will be passed through the
stages of the creative process, generating competitive advantage and profitability through
customer satisfaction, in the context of sustainable development.

Consumer

Business
Socio-economic
environment
anddesign vision

Design

Resources

Idea

Product

Sustainable design

Innovative
design
Concept

Technology

Environment
friendly
products

Consumersatisfa
ction
Rethinking the business
in the view of
sustainable development

Competitive
advantage

Quality of life

Figure no. 1.Conceptual model regarding the contribution of sustainable design in
promoting responsible business
Source: authors
Under these conditions, reconfiguring the business, with design as the driving factor, will
include the requirements of aesthetic design in addition to the economic, social,
environmental, ethical and aesthetic aspects in order to confer its products a sustainable
character (Zafarmand, Sugiyama and Watanabe, 2003):
• aesthetic durability, the possibility of continuous aesthetic;
• modularity, simplicity and minimalism of shapes, their logic and functionality;
• natural, non-polluting materials;
• promoting elements of local cultural and aesthetic identity;
The sustainable character of products also leads to an increase in their quality, but also to
changes in the perception, habits and mentality of consumers therefore causing socially
responsible manufacturers and an increased quality of life.

2. Research regarding the contribution of sustainable design to the company
development and customer satisfaction
2.1 Research methodology
In order to demonstrate the significant contribution of design on the business attempt to
meet the sustainable development requirements, the current paper aims to answer the
following questions: How does a product design influence the purchasing decision of a
consumer? What is the consumers’ perception about the link between innovation and
design? How can product design specifically contribute to the sustainable development of a
business? How much importance do Romanian companies give to design? and last but not
least, What are the main limitations of the design process?
Based on the questions this research aims to answer, there have been made a number of
assumptions to be validated through the analysis of data collected. Thus, these assumptions
are:
I1: Design can significantly influence consumers’ preferences, making it one of the
main drivers of a company’s sustainable development.
I2: Design has a major contribution to the formation of consumer perceptions about the
degree of innovation that a product includes.
I3: Product design has an important contribution to the sustainable development of a
business by reducing costs and simplifying production and maintenance processes, by
quality improving and value adding, by improving the image and the integration of specific
eco-design elements.
I4: Companies in Romania still do not give the requested importance to product design,
being an area with plenty room for improvement. In this regard, there are a number of
limitations of the design process, which must first be identified in order to find solutions for
them.
For the validation of these hypotheses, a survey was conducted in April-June 2013, which
involved applying a questionnaire among young people aged between 19-25 years, forming
a 147-respondents sample. Selecting the target audience for this research took into account
the subjects’ business training as previous knowledge on design and business sustainable
development are essential to trustworthy research results. At the same time, the age
segment is one of the most active in the new goods and services acquisition as it has a high
level of the purchasing potential.
This questionnaire evaluates the design contribution on the sustainable development
measures that a business needs and the extent to which this tool is valued by Romanian
companies. A link between design, innovation and sustainable development can be
established to assist companies toward sustainable results.

2.2 Results and Discussion
The recorded data were statistically processed and analyzed. It has been proved that the
majority of respondents consider that the product design determined a product purchase up
to a large and very large extent (78.9% according to Figure 2), leading to the conclusion
that design can significantly influence consumers’ preferences and thus I1 is confirmed.
Taking this into account, it can be argued that there is a strong need to pay special attention
to aesthetic and functional characteristics of a product in order to meet consumers’ needs in
the highest possible level.

Figure no.2. Design influence on consumers’ preferences
Source: Data analysis using SPSS
The survey results show a strong link between the perception of a product innovation and
its design, as demonstrated by the large share of respondents who see this connection as a
strong one (72.1%) or very strong (17%) as indicated in Figure 3. It is important to notice
the respondents’ unanimity in perceiving a link between innovation and design since no
respondent has chosen a very weak link between the two. This proves the theory according
to which a company that innovates must use design to highlight the innovative elements of
the product. Otherwise, if consumers cannot easily detect the improvements, it may just
turn into useless consumption of resources. In this way the second hypothesis of the article,
I2 is also validated.

Figure no.3. Design contribution on the perception of the innovation degree
Source: Data analysis using SPSS
For a proper evaluation of the design contribution on sustainable development, the design
main benefits on a company's activity were taken into account. Thus, it was observed that
design can significantly contribute to image and brand improvement (88.4% consider that

procedures improvement (76.2% perceive it high and very high), to the product quality
improvement (75.5% high and very high). An important contribution that design brings is
by adding value to product (66% medium to high), by including eco-design elements
(63.9% average to high), by simplifying the production and maintenance processes (71.4%
in the proportion of medium to high) and not the least, by reducing production costs (with a
dominant share of 66%, but in the weak to moderate). This way I3 was successfully
validated with different intensity degrees for each component, as shown in a synthetic
version in Figure 4.

very low

low

moderate
● reduction of
production costs

high

very high
● improved development
procedures

● simplifying production● improving product quality
and maintenance
process
● brand and image
● including eco-design
elements

improvement

● adding value to product

Figure no. 4. Design contribution to the sustainable development of a business
Source: Data analysis using SPSS
Correlating the results obtained so far with the fact that a percentage of 72.8% of
respondents identified a neutral to weak importance that Romanian companies grant to the
design process (variable whose evolution is shown in Figure5) requires an analysis of
potential design limitations. It turned out that design is one of the endogenous drivers of
stimulating the sustainable development of a business, a component that companies in
Romania should pay more importance.

Figure no. 5. The importance granted by Romanian companies to product design
Source: Data analysis using SPSS

This confirms the hypothesis I4 and goes further by identifying potential sources of
limitations in the design process. The responses analysis of the last question showed that by
far the most important is the issue of the insufficient funds with a share of 27.9% of all
cases, followed by the lack of value for money (18.9%), lack of qualified personnel
(18.6%) and other causes such as design/innovation potential of a company, resistance to
new or the lack of customer responses to new products and processes (Figure 6).

Figure no.6. The main limitations of the design process
Source: Data analysis using SPSS
As it can be seen from the distribution of the responses in Figure no. 6, the need for design
and innovation of consumers is higher than the ability of companies to responded to this
need, shown by the fact that the lack of customer response to new products and processes is
on the last position in the hierarchy limits of the design process. Identifying the causes is
the premise of creating a starting path in making the necessary steps that should be taken in
order to support a framework creation to encourage the use of product design techniques
inside companies for their business development in a responsible way.

Conclusions
Innovation and the knowledge economy, the shift to a creative economy, education for
creativity and innovation, cultural diversity as a support for creativity and innovation, the
challenges of sustainable development, the potential of cultural and creative industries are
problems that are intensely discussed in current scientific approaches.
Design, as an innovative process, can be a positive force for change and reconfiguration of
a business, but one must consider the consequences of its involvement. Designing a product
derives from the road intersection between technological innovations, economic conditions,
changes in consumer needs and the evolution of society.
As such, by managing the socio-economic elements of the business - as a data source, the
development of the present conceptual model intended to provide a suggestive image of the
business in the given context, its exact status. Also, by applying the principles of
business and their implications, in order to reconfigure it in the view of sustainable
development.
The development of the modern consumer, the social responsibility of manufacturers and
the moral values of the young generation are parameters by which the quality of life is
improved. Designers have a new mission: to create products that meet consumers' needs
without compromising the environment. In this context, there is no alternative but a
fundamental restructuring of the current product culture. The results of the research
confirm the conceptual model proposed by the authors and show that:
• design can significantly influence the buying preferences of the population
• there is a strong link between the perception of innovation and the design of a
product;
• any company that innovates must use design to highlight the innovative elements of
the product;
• design can significantly contribute to improving the image and the brand, improving
development procedures, improving the product quality, increasing product added value by
including elements of eco-design, by simplifying the manufacturing and maintenance
process and not finally, reducing production costs;
• sustainable design is one of the endogenous drivers for stimulating the sustainable
development of businesses, an element to which companies in Romania should pay more
importance.
Therefore, thinking of the future evolution of design, its trajectory involves:
• extending the concept of design to developing new models that encourage consumers
to not only consider the product’s shape, but also the human, cultural and environmental
impact of products;
• revaluation of initiatives and projects, thus the designer’s work will create value for
both human and natural economies;
• rethinking and upgrading technologies so as to protect the interests of globally
interconnected communities;
• promoting an increased awareness of the importance of the sustainable design
phenomenon.
The designers are trying to adapt as well as possible to technical economic, social and
environmental restrictions and realities, and all participants in the socio-economic system
must continue to produce, build and innovate, in a word to contribute to the sustainable
development of society, of which they are equally responsible.


