Lat Am Econ Rev (2018) 27:6
DOI 10.1007/s40503-017-0046-5

1 Introduction
´
In a seminal study, Dıaz Alejandro (1970) blamed Argentina’s relative decline to
the replacement of the export-oriented, market friendly policies of the early 1900s
by populist, interventionist policies around the time of the great depression. While
other authors have claimed that lower growth rates had already begun before the
change in policies, Taylor (1994) has demonstrated that any ‘‘early retardation’’
accelerates after 1929, and again after 1950, with the onset of ineffective
government intervention. In this account Argentina’s relative decline during the
20th century can be attributed, broadly, to economically inefﬁcient ‘‘populist’’
policies supplied by leaders who often exploit a mass of uneducated, poor voters.
Peron and his followers play a prominent role in such narratives of Argentina’s
exceptional underperformance. Of course, there are some variations in the basic
account. For example, it is often claimed that policymaking, even during relatively
centrist administrations, was complicated enormously by the presence of a populist
party demanding government intervention. But in the end, in this account (the
‘‘Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis’’, for short), the key problem is Argentina’s populist
tradition, which has fueled bad policies and political instability.
A troubling aspect of this account, however, is that it does not explain why voters
ﬁnd populist policies appealing. As stated, this narrative soon has to conclude that
democracy is not a reasonable way to elect the country’s leaders, and it is of some
relevance that many Argentine conservatives ended up supporting military coups.
Paradoxically, this narrative implicitly questions the very beneﬁts that can be
expected from free markets. The reason is that it maintains that the rational
judgment of market participants cannot really be trusted (in political settings).
Indeed, humans in this account must have some type of dual type of rationality: on
the one hand they are able to make a reasonable use of information so that markets
for goods and services are in fact quite efﬁcient, but on the other hand they are
unable to see that the leaders they elect are bad for them. Rationality in DiazAlejandro’s account of democratic capitalism is a bit like the Cheshire cat of Alice
in Wonderland: now you see it, now you don’t.
We structure this paper around the basic Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis (i.e., the
view that Argentina’s relative decline is caused by the government’s supply of bad
policies), but complement it by providing a theory of the demand for such ‘‘bad’’
policies. The evidence we gather suggests two peculiarities of populist beliefs: they
are often wrong (for example, they involve unrealistic expectations concerning the
inﬂationary costs of printing money); and they often reveal a distrust of market
outcomes (markets result, for example, in ‘‘unfair’’ prices and wages). An
implication of such beliefs is that voters can demand policies that lead to a decline
in output, even when this is fully anticipated (because these policies are expected to
bring about more ‘‘fairness’’). In brief, an alternative title for our paper is ‘‘The
Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis with rational voters’’.
The school of thought associated with Diaz Alejandro has sometimes been
interpreted as suggesting that markets are good for growth. Thus, a policy is deemed

classiﬁes policies as ‘‘bad’’ only when they clearly lead to unsustainable
macroeconomic imbalances. Beyond some extreme cases, it is often difﬁcult to
agree on what makes a policy clearly unsustainable. For example, it is simply not
obvious that populism is necessarily associated with unsustainable declines in
investment. Theoretically, it is possible that Peron’s redistributive policies put
enough money in the hands of workers to spur consumption. This, in turn, might
provide a promising enough internal market to compensate investors for any
political instability that populism might generate. And empirically, the evidence on
the effect of populism on total investment is mixed, as we shall see (although there
is some evidence of a negative effect when the focus is only private investment).
Perhaps a more attractive version of the Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis assigns
Argentina’s relative decline to the bottlenecks in foreign trade (produced by
excessive aversion to trade with other countries), the large ﬁscal imbalances
(produced by an underestimation of the costs of inﬂation) and the instability that
some of Peron’s redistributive policies induced. In some cases, the negative effect of
these policies was unanticipated by voters. But in other cases, agents understood the
material costs, but were seeking outcomes that appeared more ‘‘fair’’ to them.1
Economists have not made signiﬁcant progress in understanding Latin American
populism because they tend to ﬁnd the interest group theory of policy quite
compelling. In the standard account, bad policies are put in place by special interests
and voters would get rid of them if only they cared to vote or were able to organize.
Interestingly, however, voters do vote in large numbers (by and large, voting is
compulsory in Latin America), so the empirical appeal of the interest group theory
of policy formation, at least in its simplest form, appears low. A more promising
approach accepts that populist policies are in fact appealing to (at least some group
of) voters, perhaps because they do not fully understand their implications, as
argued in Dornbusch and Edwards (1991). These authors point out several instances
were policymakers in populist governments espouse views that would not be
standard in economics.2
Our analysis begins with a brief section on the historical and political background
of Peronist policies (Sect. 2). It then contains three substantive parts. In the ﬁrst,
(Sect. 3), we use qualitative data from Peron’s early speeches (1944–55) to provide
some evidence on Peron’s beliefs (i.e., positive descriptions of how the world
1

It would still be important to explain why the adherence to these policies in the late 1960s, when the
costs were becoming increasingly clear. One possible answer is that there was insufﬁcient trust between
the private and public sectors to exchange vital information about Pareto improving policies. Di Tella and
Dubra (2013) study how legitimacy of the private sector can positively inﬂuence policymaking through
the exchange of information.

2

They deﬁne populism as involving a belief in ‘‘no constraints’’: The risks of deﬁcit ﬁnance emphasized
in traditional thinking are portrayed as exaggerated or altogether unfounded. According to populist
policymakers, (monetary) expansion is not inﬂationary (if there is no devaluation) because spare capacity
and decreasing long-run costs contain cost pressures and there is always room to squeeze proﬁt margins
by price controls. (Page 9.) This can be contrasted with other deﬁnitions of populism emphasizing the
connection to socialism (e.g., Coniff 1982) or the one in Drake (1982), which focuses on political
mobilizations, the emphasis on rhetoric and the use of symbols that ‘‘inspire’’ voters. It is interesting to
note that those in charge of economic policy in Argentina were often less heterodox (as documented, for

works) and preferences (i.e., normative values describing how the world should
work). These speeches suggest to us three simple but important points. First, Peron’s
policies were known to his voters (in contrast to later Peronist presidents, such as
Carlos Menem in the 1990’s, who was elected on a platform but changed it upon
being elected). Second, what Peron is doing in the speeches, at least in part, is
providing ‘‘meaning’’ by interpreting the evidence available in the light of (what we
would call) a coherent model of the world. Although such ‘‘interpretation’’ is
unusual in economic models, it is often discussed by scholars who study beliefs (and
in ‘‘discourse analysis’’). The third and ﬁnal element in his speeches that we
emphasize is that Peron gives a prominent role to the forces that determine income.
In contrast to what the literature on varieties of capitalism has emphasized in terms
´
of the origins of income (distinguishing between effort versus luck), Peron
emphasizes the role of others in determining (reducing) our income through
exploitation. This emphasis results in a focus on actors (foreign countries and rich
local elites, whose center of vital interests was Europe rather than Argentina).3 And
in a focus on distinguishing the components of welfare: there are utility losses from
being ‘‘exploited’’, which go beyond the material losses (losing one’s dignity).
´
In the second substantive part (Sect. 4), we study Peronist beliefs after Peron’s
death and place them in comparative perspective by looking at data from the World
Values Survey in the 1990s. Respondents that declare an intention to vote for
Peronism are also those that are on low income and have low educational attainment
(relative to the middle class: these surveys do not sample those at the top of the
´
income distribution). This is consistent with our analysis of Peron’s speeches of the
1944–55 period, which appear to be on the left side of the political spectrum, and
with speciﬁc events of that period (the burning of the Jockey Club, the antiAmerican slogans, etc.).4 Our results suggest that most Argentine voters are on the
left of the political spectrum (relative to voters in the US), but that, surprisingly,
within Argentina, Peronist beliefs tend to be more on the right of the political
spectrum relative to those of the opposition. In relative terms, Peronist beliefs in the
1990s appear to be similar to Republican beliefs. In other words, the opposition to
´
Peron seems to have come from the conservatives while the opposition to the
Peronists in the 1990s seems to have come from the ideological left (although in
both periods the opposition seems to have been on higher income than the
Peronists). Put differently, what appears to be exceptional in Argentina is that the
middle class is ideologically to the left of those at the bottom of the income
distribution.
In the ﬁnal substantive section (Sect. 5) we develop a model to explain a low
‘‘demand for capitalism’’. If voters maximize something else than just their material
3

One of the Spanish words for ‘‘traitor’’ is ‘‘vendepatrias’’ (literally ‘‘seller of the motherland’’). Acario
Cotapos, a Chilean artist, once commented on the possibility of selling the motherland, adding ‘‘yes, and
let’s buy something smaller, but closer to Paris’’. Betrayal by the oligarchy during the decade prior to
´
´
Peron’s ﬁrst government is emphasized, for example, in Torres (1973) and Hernandez Arregui (1973).

4

Indeed, a small literature on the subject has claimed that Peronism is the local version of the American
Democrats or the British Labour Party. However, we can investigate the beliefs of these Peronist voters
with respect to the origins of income (e.g., luck vs effort) and compare them with those of American

payoff, then even with correct beliefs about how the world works they may demand
bad policies (from the narrow point of view of maximizing income). A voter
concerned with the fairness of outcomes is a case in point. Speciﬁcally, we assume
that voters demand that ﬁrms behave kindly (and this must be true in some
scenarios). When they do not, voters experience anger. Such anger can be expected
to fall when selﬁsh ﬁrms are punished. In Argentina ﬁrms are more likely to
misbehave than in rich countries (perhaps because of low competition or because of
low productivity), so the State must intervene (‘‘regulate to humanize Capital’’).
Section 6 concludes.

2 Peron, interventionist policies and argentine politics: background
Political instability and economic uncertainty coincide with the onset of Argentina’s
relative decline. By 1930, a military coup by a conservative group with fascist
inclinations resulted in the ﬁrst military government of the country. With the world
crisis as context, ad hoc inward looking, import substitution policies were adopted.
The succession of non-democratic governments that followed (seven) included
´
episodes of serious violence and resulted in the presidency of Peron 1946. Since
1930 and until the Menem administration of the 1990s, no democratic president was
´
able to complete its term, with the exception of the ﬁrst Peron government. This
coincided with Argentina’s economic woes. Indeed, Argentina’s comparative
economic performance (see Fig. 1 in Glaeser, Di Tella and Llach of this volume)
reveals two periods were divergence appears to be present: the period leading to the
crisis of the 1930s, when the series appears to begin to fall (with some exceptions),
and the 1970s, another period of heavy political instability, when the decline
appears to accelerate.
This suggests that, at least at this broad level of generality, there is some
merit to the hypothesis that political instability and relative economic decline

Investment/GDP
0.26
0.195
I/GDP

0.13
0.065
0.
1875

1950

2025


are positively correlated. Interestingly, the rate of investment during 1930–40
(the ‘‘infamous decade’’) appears low (9.1%), particularly when compared with
the rate prevailing during the decade prior to the start of the First World War
(19.3%), one of the periods where the government was in the hands of ‘‘elitist’’
governments and the economy was relatively open to international trade (see,
Gerchunoff and Llach 1998). Figure 1 reveals that investment over GDP rises
with Peronism, with an increasingly larger role taken by public investment
(whereas in the early years it is mainly private investment; still, it is a matter
of debate whether the increased investment helped growth, since it is unclear if
public investment was efﬁcient) until the ﬁscal crisis of the early 1980s.5 A
simple hypothesis suggested by the data is that political instability causes
lower private investment, and that this is a cause of Argentina’s relative
decline.
Several authors have emphasized the role of investment in Argentina’s relative
´
decline. Dıaz Alejandro (1970, 1988), for example, has focused on the difﬁculties in
maintaining high levels of investment once the export-oriented, market friendly
regime was replaced by the more interventionist regimes that follow the great
depression. Taylor (1994) also emphasizes the role of the pre 1913 extremely high
rates of capital accumulation, explaining how subsequent protectionist policies
resulted in a high relative price of imported capital goods, and that this contributed
to retarding capital accumulation (for evidence on the role of machinery investment
in growth, see De Long and Summers 1991). A natural extension of this line of
research is that political instability plays a similar role interfering with private
investment and contributing to Argentina’s decline. Of course, then, a key question
is why do these interventionist policies get implemented, and why does political
instability persist.
Several authors have emphasized the role of Peronism in Argentina’s develop´
ment.6 Since General Peron’s ascent to the Labor Secretariat in 1943 (with the
Military Government of General Ramirez), he was the preeminent political ﬁgure of
Argentina. Even after his death, policies have been deﬁned with relation to the
Peronist political legacy (see, for example, O’Donnell 1977 and Portantiero 1973).
Several hypotheses have been advanced to explain the causes of Peronist support. A
´
simple fact is that Peron adopted a series of policies that favored organized labor at
a time when the country was shifting towards light manufacturing (see, for example,
the analysis in Gerchunoff 1989). During this period, the share of output accounted
for by industry increased signiﬁcantly and labor became a central economic and
political force in the country. Thus, Peronist pro-labor policies in a context of
increasing importance of Labor go a long way in explaining its popular support,
even if voters only had material concerns. Some authors estimate that the real wage
for unskilled labor in the Buenos Aires area increased by 17% per year during this
5

For an alternative view of the investment performance, see Taylor (1998).

6

There is, of course, a large literature on Argentina’s economic performance and on the role played by
Peronism which is in no way summarized or reviewed in the short paragraphs offered here as context for
the relatively narrow set of points we emphasize. For a description of economic policies under the
´
´
1946–55 Peron government, see Gerchunoff (1989). See also Dıaz Alejandro (1970), Cortes Conde

period.7 It is unclear how much of this increase was sustainable, however, even in
the presence of economies of scale and higher proﬁt margins, as the internal market
expanded and import substitution became widespread (see Galiani and Somaini, this
volume). It is worth pointing out that anti-export policies also contributed to the
increase in real wages through lower prices of food (see Brambilla, Galiani and
Porto, this volume).
A less obvious cause for peronist support concerns labor reallocation. It appears
that the changing economic structure of the country involved signiﬁcant labor
migration, and that this generated new political demands. Germani (1962), for
example, has emphasized the emotional fragility of internal migrants (from the
´
provinces) and the charismatic, paternal nature of Peron’s leadership. He provides
an estimate of 83,000 migrants per year to the greater Buenos Aires area for the
period 1936–47, increasing thereafter. By 1957, Germani estimates a doubling of
the population in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area (form 3.4 to 6.3 million), so
this was a signiﬁcant phenomenon. Besides policies that directly supported labor, a
variety of social programs in different areas were put in place, ranging from
increased access to free health care, to the creation of a comprehensive housing
program and the establishment of a generous system of social security (for a good
description see, for example, Gaggero and Garro 2009). There was also the real and
´
´
symbolic role of the Eva Peron Foundation—a private entity run by Peron’s wife—
funded through contributions from the private and public entities, and which
distributed considerable amounts of social assistance (see Stawski 2005).
At the same time, institutional weaknesses contributed to the limited political
response to the country’s economic problems. Some have singled out speciﬁc
aspects, such as electoral institutions giving preeminence to the party in the decision
to re-elect politicians (see Jones et al. 2002). Others have emphasized the political
institutions that allowed unexpected changes in economic policy (see, for example,
´
Spiller and Tommasi 2005). Although electoral fraud preceded Peron, it may have
lent some legitimacy to the abuses of the Peronist regime (see, for example, Gallo
and Alston 2009). Naturally, the ability to protect the rights to property under weak
institutions was limited, and there is the possibility that this, and unexpected
changes in economic policy (or the risk of such changes), led to a weaker
investment performance (see, for example, Adelman 1999, Cortes Conde 1997, and
Gallo and Alston 2009).8 Consistent with this, there was less access to external
capital after the great depression (see Taylor, 1994). And foreign direct investment
´
fell in importance, albeit from very high levels (Dıaz Alejandro 1970 reports that
foreigners’ share of the stock of capital in 1927 was 34%, down from 48% prior to
the First World War).

7

See Murmis and Portantiero (1971). On the role of the support of socialist trade unions, see Torre
(1989). See also Horowitz (1990), Di Tella (2003) and Torre (1990), as well as O’Donnell (1977) and the
contributions collected in Brennan (1998) and Miguens and Turner (1988).

8

Saiegh (2013) makes the reasonable point that, even during the early market-friendly phase following
the passing of the liberal constitution in 1853/60, the security of some rights to property (for example, on
public debt) depended on political considerations such as the extent of partisan control over the

A somewhat different picture emerges from the period leading to the Peronist
administration of the 1970s. The relatively closed economy of the 1960s
experienced difﬁculties adjusting to economic expansions as increased imports
often led to balance of payments crises and inﬂation. Against this background, and
with the political proscription of Peronism, attempts at using wage and income
policies to stabilize the economy were unsuccessful. There were several attempts to
reduce wage pressure, typically by restricting trade unions (for example, the
Ongania government imposed a wage freeze, attempted to increase working hours,
limited labor strikes and suspended the legal status of several trade unions).
Tensions soon fuelled the presence of left wing elements, and ﬁghting communism
´
became a serious government concern. As riots erupted in Cordoba, left wing
terrorism became a political force with some legitimacy (given the lack of
democracy) and a claim to membership in the Peronist ‘‘movement’’. There is some
´
evidence that Peron himself encouraged this identiﬁcation with the left.9 During the
1970s, kidnappings and assassinations reached their peak, as the terrorist
organizations (the Marxist People’s Revolutionary Army and the Montoneros—of
Peronist extraction) clashed with the police and armed forces (see the data on the
assassination of policemen in the province of Buenos Aires in Boruchowicz and
Wagner 2013). Eventually, in the 1970s, with the terrorist organizations still active
´
after Peron’s return to the country’s presidency, he broke with them in a dramatic
speech, ejecting them from the Plaza de Mayo. Thus, in contrast to the early years,
when Peronism arrived and launched a true workers’ movement opposed to the
´
Conservatives, during the 1970s at least part of the opposition to Peron seems to
have come from the ideological left. The survey data reported later are consistent
with this description.
´
In brief, it seems clear that Peron’s arrival on the political scene in the 1940s
coincided with the increased importance of labor in Argentina’s economy, and a
reduced importance of openness to foreign capital and trade as the global economy
´
was affected by the war and the Great Depression. Accordingly, Peron’s ideology
reﬂected a degree of nationalism and faith in government intervention that would
persist over time. The Peronist opposition, however, seems to have evolved from a
traditional conservative position to a position that is on the left of the political
spectrum.

´
3 Peron in his own words
´
Peron’s political legacy has long been a matter of controversy. A natural hypothesis
is that, given that he was a fascist sympathizer, his ideological legacy must simply
be fascism. This would answer the question of how bad policies (e.g., excessively
´
interventionist/expansionist) come to be implemented: Peron’s authoritarian rule
imposed such polices. For our purposes, the biggest problem with this argument is
9

´
For example, while in exile in Madrid, Peron appears to have designated John William Cooke, a man
who argued for ‘‘armed struggle’’ based on the Cuban model, as his main representative in the country.
´

that such policies appear to be popular with the electorate, and they continued to be
´
so even after Peron was deposed and the most egregious aspects of his authoritarian
rule (such as indoctrination) were no longer active.10 Note also that some elements
´
in Peron’s ideology have a different origin: the idea that government policy should
attempt to ‘‘humanize capital’’, for example, has conservative (and Christian) roots
and is present in the European Christian democrats. Furthermore, Peronism seems to
involve opinions about economic independence and policy interventions that are
central in socialism (and in other, less authoritarian political forms).
´
It is also of some signiﬁcance that Peron’s political ideology was developing in
the immediate aftermath of the First World War. Born in 1895, he was in his
twenties when the communist revolution took over Russia. He was 28-years-old at a
time when the Weimar republic was struggling with war reparations, and foreigners
became a convenient political scapegoat, together with bankers, Jews and
speculators. Thus, it is perhaps unsurprising that attribution (particularly to external
forces) plays a big role in his speeches. And he was 35 as the Great Depression
affected the world economy and rich countries were starting to cope relying on
public works programs and expanded government spending (in part linked to
rearmament). Perhaps even more signiﬁcantly, in 1935 one of the ﬁrst actions of the
newly created central bank was a bailout of the banking system at a large social cost
(della Paolera and Taylor 2002). Thus, it must have been clear to him that large
shocks could disrupt the macroeconomy to a very large extent, making individual
effort often irrelevant in the determination of income.
The Peronist regime of the 1940s and 50s accompanied the economic changes
that were implemented, ﬁrst from the Labor Secretariat and then from the
Presidency, with a powerful new rhetoric that gave workers a preeminent role in the
formation of policy. Keynesian solutions were becoming known, in part through
president Roosevelt’s actions, and some of these ideas were making their way to
Argentina.11 Rhetoric, of course, was only one element in a broad attempt to create
support for the social and political changes that would sustain the redistribution of
income at the core of Peronist policies. Other elements included a set of political
rituals linked to mass mobilization, the emotional appeal of Evita and a clear
attempt to inﬂuence people’s perceptions and beliefs through propaganda. Although
´
we study Peron’s speeches, we note that this might be a relatively narrow focus,
particularly given the discussion of these elements appearing in Plotkin (2003). Of
10

One difference with fascism, for example, is that trade union leaders were closer (more loyal) to
´
members of the union than to the government (perhaps in spite of Peron’s wishes). Also, there were
´
attempts at constructing ‘‘Peronism without Peron’’ and instances of trade union leaders who were
´
´
perceived to be quite independent of Peron (leading to the extreme view that Peron himself was involved
in the killing of trade union leader Vandor). And, most importantly, large increases in the Labor share of
GDP took place under Peronist administrations (for historical evidence and a comparison with Australia,
see Gerchunoff and Fajgelbaum 2006). See also Germani (1962) and Lewis (1980) for interesting
discussions.
11

´
Federico Pinedo and Luis Duhau, together with Raul Prebisch, put in place the Plan de Accion
´
Economica Nacional in 1933. They were inﬂuential in affecting foreign trade and in the creation of the
Argentine Central Bank in 1935. Della Paolera and Taylor (1999) describe heterodox monetary policy
after 1929, the change in beliefs and expectations following the shift in monetary regime and the

course, a potentially important determinant of beliefs is the education system, and
the Peronist regime heavily intervened in the design of the national curriculum and
´
the public schools system (see, for example, Bernetti and Puiggros 1993; Bianchi
´
1992; Escude 1990). A broader study of political ideas in Argentina appears in
Romero (1987).
´
Previous work in the ﬁeld of discourse analysis by Sigal and Veron (2003)
´
focused on Peron’s speeches.12 They analyze several aspects of his discourses and
put special emphasis on their political dimension. For example, Sigal and Veron put
´
forward the interesting hypothesis that Peron actively constructs the notion that he
‘‘arrives’’ to the State from the ‘‘outside’’ (e.g., a life dedicated to the military) to
provide unity/harmony to a divided country (during 1973–4, the main focus of their
analysis), which is signiﬁcant given some of the electoral decisions made at the
time. In contrast to this work, we focus on the economic dimension of his early
speeches.
´
It is possible to study Peron’s ideas through his books, particularly those written
´
in the context of the controversy with the American Ambassador (Peron 1946) or his
´
ﬁrst book following his exile (Peron 1958). Yet, the analysis of speeches is
important for at least three reasons. First, we are not sure how many people read his
books, while we know that participation in his rallies was massive. For example, an
´
estimate supplied by the ‘‘La Razon’’ newspaper put two million people attending a
´
´
Peron rally on August 22nd, 1951. Second, the subset of Peron’s ideas included in
his speeches presumably provides us with some sense of what he himself thought
´
would be well received by his voters. Finally, an important part of Peron’s ideas
were communicated through speeches at that time; books became more important
during exile.
The material we studied was contained in 62 speeches, delivered between
October 15th, 1944 and May 1st, 1953. They include a few speeches during rallies
(as reported in the media), some speeches during particular celebrations, as well as
messages to congress and other legislative bodies. It should be noted that there is
some variation in the content of the speeches, which can be traced back to the
changing economic circumstances (such as those made around the 1951–2 crisis
´
where Peron justiﬁes a less expansionary stance).
´
3.1 Peron’s speeches
The ﬁrst striking point (to an economist) of his speeches is their low informational
content. In contrast to what might be expected, they are not of the form: ‘‘I am
informing the people of Argentina that we are facing a shock with the following
characteristics, and here is what we are going to do about it.’’ In other words, they
are not predominantly exercises in the transmission of information. Rather, they are
heavily interpreted narratives of what has happened in the past, and how the
conclusions that we draw from looking at history can help us shape policy in the
12
There are several interesting cultural aspects of Peronism that we do not discuss, including the focus
on one date (October 17th), when Peronism ‘‘starts’’. For a discussion and several of the key details of the

present. In brief, a key element of the speeches is that they are primarily centered on
the reinterpretation of already available information. Also, scholars working on
analysis of discourse would say he is engaged in the ‘‘production of meaning’’. In
particular, such research is concerned with establishing the ‘‘source’s relationship to
the content’’ (related in this case to the source’s status). Under the assumption that
minds and memory are malleable in this way, an economist would have no problem
modeling it as a (self-interested) activity of the politician. An example is Glaeser
(2005), where politicians supply stories and voters fail to investigate their accuracy.
Finally, the speeches can also be interpreted as trying to inﬂuence the system of
values of the population. In this regard, Rokeach (1973) is an inﬂuential study of
value systems and their impact on behavior (also focusing, in part, on the writings of
major political ﬁgures). See also Converse (1964) and, for a recent review, Kinder
(1998).
´
The second, and perhaps key part of this ‘‘interpretation exercise’’, is that Peron
assumes the role of a heroic whistleblower, denouncing a corrupt state of affairs
where politicians are ‘‘bought’’ by one particular group in society (the economic and
cultural elite, who are seduced by all things foreign) to enact policies against
´
workers and the poor. It is a variation of the theme of Peron’s ‘‘arrival’’ as an
external player (as emphasized by Sigal and Veron but with special signiﬁcance for
the beliefs about the generation of income). One example is:
It can be seen that, not versed in the art of pretending, I have exposed the
distressing situations that burdened my feelings as I absorbed the Daedalus of
laws and decrees (…) which in a large number of cases restricted the rights of
workers, or, if they recognized them, it would be to kill the last trace of the
hope of justice. May 1st, 1945.
I have been accused of having agitated the conscience of the country’s
workers. Of having created a social problem where none existed before …
instead of silencing the inequalities and social injustices, I have uncovered
them so that we all could know where evil was and we could ﬁnd the more
convenient medicines…. The previous tactic consisted in faking a social
welfare … with the exclusive aim of not disturbing the good digestion of the
golden Bourgeoisie. May 1st, 1945.
Another characteristic of his speeches is the continuous attempt to reassure
supporters that he has a coherent view of the world. Examples take place in several
´
speeches, but the one on May 24th, 1950 is centered on explaining Peron’s theories.
He begins by reacting to accusations that his is not a coherent economic plan, stating
that
It has been said that … the Justicialista movement lacks an economic theory.
Nothing more untrue. We have a perfect economic theory. What happens is
that we have not yet spelled it out because we did not want that the oligarchs,
or the capitalist consortia that exploited the country through conscienceless
and avaricious bosses, could, knowing our plan, stop our action … When we
have been able to dominate these international monopolies or the forces of the

And he explains (in the same speech) some details
… old economic theory … was based on a principle called ‘‘hedonic’’. … what
does it represent? The capitalist says ‘‘my capital is the basis of the economy
because I am the one who promotes, pays and makes. As a consequence I
produce 10, and don’t produce less or more as in both cases I lose.’’ But me,
the sociologist, I tell him: ‘‘Yes sir, you produce 10, but here this man has to
eat and he tells me that 10 is not enough, he needs 20’’. Then the capitalist
replies to me ‘‘Ah, let him explode, let him eat with 10 because if I produce
more of that I lose money.’’… That is when the hedonic principle stops being
so naturally rational, least of all from the point of view of welfare, which is the
basis of all organized communities. … we do not want an economy
subordinated to capital, we want capital subordinated to the economy … If,
after that, the capitalist is able to ﬁll its coffer with gold, let him do it; we don’t
care; even better if he does. But we can’t do that until the people is satisﬁed
and happy and has the purchasing power needed to achieve a minimum of
happiness, without which life is not worth living. May 24th, 1950.
´
We now turn to three aspects of Peron’s speeches that lay the foundations for our
model in Sect. 5: a description of the types of businesspeople, elaborations on the
idea that ‘‘others’’ determine our income, and ﬁnally some ideas on what constitutes
appropriate Government policy.
3.2 Types of Businesspeople
The ‘‘conspiracy’’ that Peron comes to uncover is relevant to workers because it
identiﬁes an inﬂuence on their income. This representation requires that capitalists,
´
at least until Peron’s ‘‘arrival’’, were unkind (inconsiderate or who made their
money through corrupt means). The speeches include constant references to such
‘‘bad types’’ amongst business people.
People have been faced with the idea that a fateful lodge of demagogues was
the ruling class of the country, its elite, and as such was made up by wise, rich
and kind people. It has to be pointed out that the wise have rarely been rich
and the rich have rarely been kind. October 15th, 1944.
In other words, those privileged by the capitalist regime are ﬁnished; those
that had everything, that took the cow in the ship when they went to Europe to
have coffee with milk. No, let’s have them have coffee with milk, but with
powder milk. It is not that bad for them. May 12th, 1950.
It used to be easy for capitalists: when there was a strike workers were put in
jail, they were processed and they did not rise again. … Remember Vasena. …
Workers confronted the situation but the result was several thousand men
dead. The oligarchs were all home doing the ‘‘ﬁve o’clock tea’’. … It used to
happen that a capitalist who was almost bankrupt was made to earn, with just a
signature, two or three million pesos without him having the need to do more

this way favors were being granted upon someone who perhaps was a
shameless one. August 9th, 1950.

3.3 ‘‘Others’’ determine our income
´
With ‘‘bad types’’ amongst the capitalists, it was easier for Peron to press forward
with the idea that the process where income was generated was under their
inﬂuence. This matches well with the widespread belief that Argentina is a rich
country and one has to ﬁnd an explanation for why there is want amidst plenty (for a
discussion of belief formation when natural resources are important, see Di Tella
et al. 2010). Indeed, one part of his speeches can be reduced to arguments in support
of the idea that instead of individual effort (internal to the individual) or luck
(external but without intention), the relevant inﬂuence on income is an external
force with human intention. It is ‘‘others’’ who are actively taking actions that lower
the income of Argentinians. It is not a question of making a bigger effort at the
individual level; nor a question of taking a collective stand to reduce the inﬂuence of
natural elements (perhaps through insurance or a better selection of activities and
crops). It is a question of actively opposing other actors that try to ‘‘exploit’’
Argentines (on the role of corruption perceptions in explaining the appeal of
capitalism, see Di Tella and MacCulloch 2009).
There are numerous examples of this conception of the income generating
´
process, and the support of the State in enforcing it, in Peron’s speeches. One
example is
The economic destiny of workers was exclusively in the hands of the bosses
… and if workers organized a protest movement or adopted an attitude in
defense of their rights, they were left out of the law and exposed to the bosses’
response and the police repression. … A group of capitalists, characterized the
most by its continued, bloody opposition to workers’ vindications, has plotted
an unthinkable maneuver to neutralize the steps that had been adopted to stop
the rise in the cost of living … and counteract the effects of inﬂation. May 1st,
1945.
… we need arms, brains, capital. But capital that is humanized in its function,
which puts the public’s welfare before a greedy interest in individual proﬁt. I
express my strongest rejection to the God of unproductive and static gold, to
the cold and calculating super capitalism that harbors in its metallic gutters
Shylock’s infamous sentiments. May 1st, 1947.
In the year 1943 our economy was in the hands of foreign capitalist consortia
because, until 1943, those consortia were those that paid a vile price to
producers, gathered, exported, transported and sold to foreign consumers the
produce of Argentine work. It cannot be doubted that most of the proﬁts went
to such intermediation. March 5th, 1950.
There might remain some former exploiter of human labor, who cannot

companies who might yearn for the times of the Bembergs, when treason was
also proﬁtable… May 1st, 1950.
300 families in our country, for example, put together their capital and
enslaved 17 million Argentines. August 9th, 1950.
We are in favor that a man might enrich himself working, but we oppose that
he might do so defrauding or taking advantage of other people’s weaknesses.
We want (…) that each Argentine has prosperity and good fortune within
reach, but we do not accept that to obtain them he would commit crimes
against other Argentines or against the community that we all are a part of.
March 5th, 1952.
On some occasions, as in the reference to industrialist Otto Bemberg above,
´
Peron names speciﬁc members of the elite. In one case members of the elite are
described as themselves guilty of exploiting other capitalists. The example is
The monopoly, be it called … Bunge y Born, Dreyfus, etc. … was the one
doing the gathering … the poor producer received six pesos and this
intermediary octopus received thirty or forty for what somebody else had
produced … When this is organized properly, the small farmer will produce,
transport, gather, sell; and the product will go exclusively to him and not for
the ‘‘smart one’’, who constitutes a tumor that was placed in the middle.
August 9th, 1950.
Yet in some of these same speeches he distinguishes between local and foreign
capitalists and justiﬁes the behavior of the former. This is often mentioned in the
context of speeches with a strong nationalist component.
When I have said that there was excessive exploitation, I have not blamed our
bosses, because I know full well that our bosses were themselves exploited
from the other side (…) That is why we have bought the railroads and
everything else concerning public services (…) May 12th, 1950.
3.4 Appropriate government policy
These descriptions of the state of affairs in Argentina at the time naturally lead to
the justiﬁcation of a set of interventionist policies adopted to address these
problems. Interestingly, in these portions of his speeches, the announced policies are
not only linked to the solution of the set of economic problems uncovered, but
Argentine identity (i.e., the ‘‘type’’ of person who would implement these policies)
are. There is a connection to identity in that there are (apparently discreet)
categories of people that take certain actions, so that when these actions change,
identity also changes, which appears inherently desirable (for a model of identity
see Akerlof and Kranton 2005). It is as if people who are able to defy their
exploiters and stand up for their rights (and cannot be fooled into accepting

The speeches provide several examples of the interventionist policies that match
´
the needs created by Peron’s description of the main problems faced by Argentina.
These include,
We implement, in a loyal and sincere fashion, a social policy designed to give
workers a human place in society, we treat him as a brother and as an
Argentine. October 15th, 1944.
No man should earn less than what he needs to live. … We said that there is a
line for life determined by the minimum essential wage, and those below that
line were the submerged; and that in our country there could not be
‘‘submerged’’; everyone had to be ‘‘emerged’’. October 21st, 1946.
If we have intervened in some (enterprises) it has been because we had to
somehow (avoid) the constant outﬂow of national wealth. (…) not only we
respect private activity, but we also help and protect it. The only thing we
don’t want is a return to the old age of monopolistic consortia of exploitation.
We want that men work (…) as they see ﬁt but we do not want that it takes
place at the expense of the consumer or the producer. We want that he who
produces wealth may place it without pressure or exploitation of any type.
February 7th, 1950.
´
The Estatuto del Peon, might not be to the liking of some exploiters-withoutconscience, (…) who have been upset at the possibility that I might defend
with more enthusiasm the perfecting of the human race than that of Argentine
bulls or dogs. March 5th, 1950.
One of the barriers to national unity was undoubtedly the injustices committed
by the capitalist oligarchy exploiting workers with the complicity of the
authorities … in charge of distributive justice…. A people with an immense
majority of slaves cannot be free, just as a free people can never be subjugated.
… I am not exaggerating when I say that in 1943 there were slaves in the
Argentine Republic. May 1st, 1950.
Today, May 1st, the La Prensa newspaper … will be handed over to the
workers … This newspaper, which exploited its workers and the poor during
years, which was a reﬁned instrument of all foreign and national exploitation,
which represented the crudest form of treason to the motherland, will have to
purge its sins serving the working people. May 1st, 1951.
The government is committed to enforcing price controls, even if that means
hanging them all. … They have a right to earn, but they don’t have a right to
steal. May 1st, 1952.
´
This simpliﬁed overview of Peron’s speeches suggests to us that an important
component of Peronist beliefs is that others determine our welfare. This suggests
two changes to the standard formulation in economics, where agents are assumed to
derive income from individual effort or from luck (which is beyond anyone’s
control). The ﬁrst is that other players can affect an individual’s income (local elites,

dimension, which we interpret as an inﬂuence of fairness in people’s welfare (and
not just income). Given these beliefs, there is a role for government in ensuring that
workers are treated with dignity (‘‘humanize capital’’), which we interpret as some
reassurance that ﬁrms are behaving with some reasonable amount of concern for
workers’ well-being.

4 Peronism and the American democrats: differences in survey data
on beliefs and values
´
Given Peron’s continued inﬂuence on political and economic events even after the
1955 coup, it is of interest to provide at least some evidence on the later evolution of
Peronist beliefs and values, and to place them in comparative perspective (for
example, by comparing them to American beliefs as a benchmark). The approach
we follow is to focus on a snapshot of the public’s interpretation of Peronism at a
later date. Unfortunately, continued survey data from different periods are
unavailable. However, we have data on beliefs and voting pertaining to the 1990s
from a comparative survey that contains data for the US and Argentina (and other
countries). Of course, the 1990s was a period where both the US and Argentina are
ruled by two politicians, Menem and Clinton, that are elected on a platform that is
on the left of the political spectrum but who end up implementing reforms that are
more consistent with centrist/conservative values. Of course, there are some
differences: in the case of the US this happens only after there are mid-term
electoral losses and mainly involve welfare reforms and the dropping of some of the
less popular initiatives such as healthcare reform, whereas in the case of Menem the
departures were larger and made from the start of the term. They also involved a
complex relationship with the labor movement, which was an important early
supporter of Menem (see Murillo 2001, Levitsky 2003 and Etchemendy and
Palermo 1998, for discussions; on policy reversals in Latin America during this
period, see Stokes 2001).
Our interest in comparisons with the US comes from a hypothesis ‘‘explaining’’
Peronism as the Argentine version of the American democrats (given that they are
supported by similar demographic and socio-economic groups). A similar point is
often made with respect to Peronism and the British Labour Party. Cross-country
survey data on people’s opinion about elements of capitalism is available from the
World Values Survey. Coordinated by Ronald Inglehart, the 1995–97 wave asks
adults (older than 18) in over 50 countries several questions of interest. In the US,
the data are obtained from a representative sample of individuals age 18 and older
through face to face interviews. In Argentina, sampling was limited to the urbanized
central portion of the country, where about 70% of the population is concentrated.13
Importantly for our purposes, the survey contains data on (self-reported) voting,
allowing us to derive measures of vote intention, or at least political sympathy,
13
Within this region, 200 sampling points were selected, with approximately ﬁve individuals being
interviewed in each sampling point through multi-stage probability sampling. Regions include the
´
´

Table 1 The Education and Income of Peronists and democrats Source: Own elaboration based on
World Value Survey, Wave 3
Peronists

NonPeronists

Democrats

Republicans

Percentage of group answering family income is in
lowest 5 of 10 categories

69

59

42

29

Percentage of group answering education is in lowest
6 of 9 categories

88

69

56

47

Peronist (Non-Peronist) is the sub-sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the Peronist
Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) are the sub-sample of Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. Family Income is the
respondent’s answer to a question about total family income. Education is the respondent’s educational
achievement

towards the main parties in the country, including Peronists. Thus, we ﬁrst divide
the sample in Argentina into two groups: between those that declare to vote for
Peronists and those that declare to want to vote for other groups. The precise
question asked is: ‘‘If there were a national election tomorrow, for which party on
this list would you vote? Just call out the number on this card.’’ Then a card with ‘‘1.
Partido Justicialista, 2. Union Civica Radical, 3. Frepaso, 4. Modin and 7. Blank
ballot’’ is shown. Peronists are those answering 1, while non-Peronists are those
answering 2, 3 and 4. In the US, a similar procedure allows us to determine two
subsamples: Republicans and democrats.
We then used a measure of income to divide the sample into two categories (rich
and poor). The question asked was ‘‘Here is a scale of incomes. We would like to
know in what group your household is, counting all wages, salaries, pensions and
other incomes that come in. Just give the letter of the group your household falls
into, before taxes and other deductions.’’ Then, a scale with 10 groups,
corresponding to the income deciles in the country, is shown (this scale is different
in each country). We classify as poor those in the lowest ﬁve categories. Table 1
shows that 69% of Peronists, whereas 59% on non-Peronists, report incomes that are
ˆ
in the lowest ﬁve categories (see Benoıt and Dubra 2011, who show that it is not
necessarily irrational for a majority of people to rank themselves in the bottom half
of a distribution). In the US, within those admitting a preference for voting a
particular group, we note that within those that prefer the democrats, 42% declare to
be in the lowest 5 deciles, while only 29% of Republicans ﬁnd themselves there.
This broadly corresponds to the idea that Peronists and democrats share a similar
base of support (at least in the limited sense that they have more support amongst
the poor than the opposition). Table 1 also shows results using educational
attainment and reaches a similar conclusion.14 These results echo the conclusion of
14
The question asks ‘‘What is the highest educational level that you have attained?’’ and it provides as
possible answers the (functional equivalent for each society) of ‘‘1. No formal education, 2. Incomplete
primary school, 3. Complete primary school, 4. Incomplete secondary school: technical/vocational type,
5. Complete secondary school: technical/vocational type, 6. Incomplete secondary: university-preparatory
type, 7. Complete secondary: university-preparatory type, 8. Some university-level education, without

Table 2 The beliefs of Peronists and democrats: Luck vs. Effort Source: Own elaboration based on
World Value Survey, Wave 3
Peronists

Non-Peronists

Democrats

Republicans

Laziness

39

20

49

75

Unfair society

61

80

51

25

Ratio

0.64

0.25

0.96

3

Run by a few big interests

71

95

76

68

Run for all

29

5

24

32

Ratio

2.4

19

3.2

2.1

Luck vs. Effort

Beliefs about who runs economy

(1) Peronist (Non-Peronist) is the sub-sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the
Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) are the sub-sample of
Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. (2) ‘‘Laziness’’ is the
fraction of these groups answering ‘‘They are poor because of laziness and lack of willpower’’ to the
question ‘‘Why in your opinion are there people in this country who live in need?’’, whereas ‘‘Unfair
Society’’ is the group answering ‘‘They are poor because society treats them unfairly’’. (3) ‘‘Run by a few
big interests’’ is the group giving that answer to the question ‘‘Generally speaking, would you say that this
country is run by a few big interests looking out for themselves, or that it is run for the beneﬁt of all the
people?’’

a Peronist politician who declared upon looking at an electoral map, ‘‘progress
compromises us, education kills us’’. In auxiliary tests (not reported) we tried selfreported social class and reached similar results: Peronists and democrats seem to
represent similar groups in their societies (the poor and those with low educational
attainment).15
Given our interest in the role of beliefs, it is relevant to see if these similarities
extend to beliefs about the role of luck and other economic issues. Given that we do
not take a position of the relative importance of each belief in determining Peronist
ideology, we do not construct formal tests and so our results are only illustrative.
The classic belief concerns the role of luck (versus effort) in the generation of
income. The question usually used to capture this belief is ‘‘Why, in your opinion,
are there people in this country who live in need? Here are two opinions: Which
comes closest to your view? 1. They are poor because of laziness and lack of will
power, 2. They are poor because society treats them unfairly’’. The results are
summarized in Table 2.
The main pattern is that the whole electorate in Argentina seems to be on the left
of the political spectrum, as most people seem to believe that poverty is the result of
luck (or that society treats them unfairly) rather than laziness. However, in relative
terms the Peronists seem to exhibit a pattern closer to the one of the Republicans
instead of the democrats. Indeed, the biggest proportion of believers in laziness as a
source of poverty takes place amongst Peronists and the Republicans. The ratio of
believers in Laziness (39%) to believers in an unfair society (61%) in the Peronist
15
The question used reads ‘‘People sometimes describe themselves as belonging to the working class, the
middle class, or the upper or lower class. Would you describe yourself as belonging to the: 1. Upper class,

Table 3 Beliefs in Argentina and the US: Peronists look like Republicans Source: Own elaboration
based on World Value Survey, Wave 3
Argentina
Ratio
(Peronist/Non-Peronist)
Poor are lazy

United States
Ratio
(Republican/Democrat)

Workers should follow instructions

2.6 = 0.64/0.25

3.1 = 3/0.96

0.64 = 39/61; 0.25 = 20/80

3 = 75/25;0.96 = 49/51

1.6

2.4

=0.81/0.51; 45/55;34/66

=3.35/1.4, 77/23;58/42

Run by few big interests

0.1

0.7

=2.4/19; 71/29;95/5

=2.1/3.2, 68/32;76/24

Jobs for men instead of women

2.1

1.3

=0.59/0.28, 34/58;20/71

=0.37/0.3, 23/63;21/71

More respect for authority

4.4

2.2

=15/3.4, 75/5;54/16

=28/12, 84/3;75/6

More importance of money

0.5

0.8

=3.3/6.5; 66/20;72/11

=9.6/11, 67/7;70/6

Acceptable to cheat

1.9

1.2

=4.9/2.6, 83/17;72/28

=6.1/4.9, 86/14;83/17

Competition good

1.2

2.1

=1.2/1, 55/45;50/50

=2.7/1.3, 73/27;57/43

(1) Peronist (Non-Peronist) is the sub-sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the
Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) are the sub-sample of
Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. (2) Deﬁnitions of beliefs
in Appendix 2

sub-sample is 0.64, whereas amongst non-Peronists it is 20–80%, for a ratio of 0.25.
On the other hand, the percentage of believers in laziness (unfair society) amongst
the democrats is 49% (51% respectively), whereas amongst the Republicans is much
higher 75–25%. Focusing on the ratios of laziness to unfairness, the democrats have
a ratio of 0.96, whereas that for the Republicans is 3.
As another illustration, Table 2 considers the question ‘‘Generally speaking,
would you say that this country is run by a few big interests looking out for
themselves, or that it is run for the beneﬁt of all the people?’’ with answers ‘‘1. Run
by a few big interests, and 2. Run for all the people’’. Again, we ﬁnd that the two
groups in Argentina (Peronists and non-Peronists) tend to give the answer that is
presumably on the left of the political spectrum (Run by a few big interests), but the
relative position of Peronists in Argentina is more like the relative position of
Republicans than of democrats.
Table 3 considers several beliefs that are relevant to understanding Peronists
beliefs and values. One theme emerging from this table when looking at the absolute
level of their answers, is that Argentines tend to be more on the ‘‘left’’ of the
political spectrum (consistent with Di Tella and MacCulloch 2009). More
interesting, they all point out in a similar direction in relative terms: the Peronists

democrats). In all cases the ratio in Argentina and in the US are on the same side of
1. Take for example, the idea that workers should follow instructions at work. We
split answers into two groups, those answering ‘‘they should’’ on the one hand, and
those that answer either ‘‘it depends’’ or ‘‘they should be convinced ﬁrst’’ on the
other hand. The majority of republican voters (77 versus 23% of them, or in a
proportion 3.35–1), perhaps not surprisingly, tend to answer that workers should
follow instructions. Democrats have a similar position, but less intense (the
proportion 58/42 is just under 1.4–1). So, in relative terms, Republicans are
somewhat more likely to agree with this statement.
In Argentina most people disagree with this statement, as reﬂected by both
Peronists and non-Peronists having ratios that are lower than one, consistent with
respondents being on the left. However, the ratio for Peronists (0.81 = 45/55) is
somewhat higher than that for non-Peronists (0.51 = 34/66), suggesting that in
relative terms, Peronists are more likely to agree with the idea that workers should
follow orders than non-Peronists, which is surprising given Peronist’s afﬁnity with
´
labor causes, at least as detected in Peron’s speeches.
The rest of Table 3 investigates a number of other beliefs and values appearing in
´
Peron’s speeches. For example, he discusses competition on his speech of March 5,
1952: ‘‘Progress and individual prosperity cannot be based rationally in the harming
of others because that unleashes an egoist and merciless struggle, which cancels all
cooperation, destroys solidarity and ends in dissociation’’. The beliefs covered in the
Table include those related to the role of luck versus effort in the determination of
income, and the role of others in affecting individual fates (already discussed), as
well as those related to feminism (jobs for men), authoritarian views (respect for
authority), materialism (less emphasis on money), honesty (acceptable to cheat),
competition (competition is harmful) and economic organization (ownership of
business). In all cases, the answers given by Peronist voters (relative to those given
by the opposition) are similar to the answers given by Republicans (relative to the
democrats).
In brief, the evidence from the 1990s suggests that the opposition to Peronism is
on the ideological left, even though they are on higher income and educational
achievement than the Peronists. If it is true that the opposition to Peron came from
the conservatives, then it is plausible to conclude that Peronism has experienced less
ideological change than the rest of the country.

5 A model of labor market exploitation based on altruistic preferences
The previous sections highlight the role of several elements that are non-standard in
economic models. Two that are of particular interest to us are the idea that there is
something more to market transactions in the labor market than just the exchange of
work for money. There is also the possibility of exploitation, connected to ﬁrm
owners who do not care about the welfare of their workers. The speech of August 9,
´
1950 is typical. Note that the part where Peron states ‘‘Workers confronted the
situation but the result was several thousand men dead. The oligarchs were all home

stress the contrast between the fate of workers whose life is in danger with that of
employers who are oblivious to their predicament and more preoccupied with
engaging in a social practice that is the norm in England. Accordingly, the model we
develop is one where there is the possibility of worker exploitation by ‘‘unkind’’
´
elites, and Peron’s punishment of these elites provides increases in worker total
utility through an emotional (non-material) channel.
The model in this section is an adaptation of the model in Di Tella and Dubra
(2013) to labor markets. It stresses the idea that a policy that may not be optimal
under ‘‘standard’’ models (that ignore emotions), may become optimal if workers
experience anger when they are exploited, and the government knows it. To make
our point, we introduce emotions in the form of worker anger at perceptions of
insufﬁcient ﬁrm altruism (as in Levine, 1998 and Rotemberg, 2008) in the textbook
version of Salop (1979).
There are n workers, each characterized by a parameter x interpreted as either a
1.

‘‘preferred variety, preferred workplace’’; this can represent
(a)
(b)

2.

A taste for working in one industry over another.
A cost of re-converting the workers’ human capital to another industry.

‘‘location parameter; how far away do I live from my workplace’’.

For each worker, his location is drawn from a uniform distribution on the circle
of circumference 1. There are m evenly distributed ﬁrms along the circle (there are
m ﬁrms, but we use b = 1/m as the relevant parameter measuring concentration);
ﬁrms are of one of two types, altruistic or selﬁsh. Workers can supply either one unit
of labor, or 0; this binary choice is a simpliﬁcation, which is in line with the
indivisibilities postulated in Hansen (1985). Individuals’ gross utility of not working
is s; when they work, if they have to travel a distance x (or they are x away from
their preferred job) and they receive a pay of w, their net surplus is w-tx-s (i.e.,
they have a transport cost of t per unit of distance traveled).
In addition to these material costs, the worker may become angry with the ﬁrm
for which he works. There are several reasons why incorporating emotions in this
setup makes sense. First, simple introspection tells us that we don’t always do what
is best from a narrowly deﬁned ‘‘economic’’ perspective. Second, a large body of
literature has shown in the laboratory that individuals don’t always maximize the
amount of money they receive (even when the choices don’t involve effort), and that
emotions play a signiﬁcant role. This reaction has been modeled as a preference for
fair outcomes, as in Levine (1998) and Rotemberg (2008), who show how the
introduction of a reciprocal altruism term in the utility function can explain quite
well the seemingly paradoxical evidence from ultimatum games (see also Fehr and
Schmidt 1999 inter alia). Finally, a third motivation to include emotions in our
´
model of the labor market is that Peron’s speeches contain several direct references

What is the social economy? It is a change in the old system of exploitation,
not like the communists want, but in a gentler form. The capitalist regime is an
abuse of property. The communist solution is the suppression of property. We
believe the solution is not the suppression of property but rather the
suppression of the abuse of property. … We are not involved in a social
ordering that will take the country into a ﬁght, but rather to calmness. June
24th, 1948.
If a worker is angry, we must subtract from his utility a term k(p ? p-w), where
p is the productivity of the worker in the ﬁrm, and p is the proﬁt the ﬁrm obtains
from the other workers. This term is just a ‘‘spite’’ term: when angry, the worker
dislikes the ﬁrms making a proﬁt, and he is angrier when he contributes to those
proﬁts. What triggers anger is that the individual rejects the hypothesis that the ﬁrm
is altruistic.
In this market, ﬁrms choose wage levels (i.e., it is not a competitive market)
w and get in exchange a product of p per worker, so when total employment is E its
proﬁts are (p-w)E. If the ﬁrm is not altruistic, that is all there is in the ﬁrms&utility
(utility = proﬁts). If the ﬁrm is altruistic, its utility is proﬁts plus a term that
depends on the utility of the worker. The altruistic ﬁrm has a cost of a if worker
utility is lower than a certain level (this level is exogenous for this model, but can
come from learning, adaptation, history, etc.) We call the threshold s; we will set it
to be the utility the worker would obtain in a ‘‘fairly competitive’’ labor market (see
below).
In what follows, and without loss of generality, we normalize t = 1 and all other
parameters are just ‘‘normalized by t’’. This normalization is completely general.
We also assume (without loss of generality) that the number of workers is n = 1.

6 Equilibrium
We will analyze a signaling game, in which ﬁrms, when choosing a wage level,
signal their type. An equilibrium in this setting is a triplet [e(w,x;l),w(h);l(w)]
where:
•

•
•
•

e(Á) is an ‘‘employment’’ decision strategy (the same for all workers; we are
looking at symmetric equilibria) as a function of wage w, tastes x (or distance)
and beliefs l (of whether the ﬁrm is altruistic or not) into {0,1}, where a = 1
means ‘‘work’’ and a = 0 means ‘‘don& work’’;
t
w(Á) is a function that maps types into wages (one wage for each type; the same
function for all ﬁrms);
l(Á) is a function that maps wages into [0,1], such that l(w) is a number that
represents the probability that the worker assigns to the ﬁrm being altruistic.
e is optimal given x, w and l; w is optimal given e (and other ﬁrms playing w); l
is consistent (it is derived from Bayes&rule whenever possible).

We will focus on equilibria, where beliefs are of the sort ‘‘I reject the ﬁrm is

We are ruling out (for example) equilibria in which the worker rejects that the ﬁrm
is altruistic if the ﬁrm pays a wage w [ w* (i.e., the worker comes to believe the
ﬁrm is selﬁsh even if it is paying a wage above the ‘‘target’’ wage; which would be
of course unnatural); in standard signaling models, beliefs like these may still be
part of an equilibrium, because in equilibrium one does not observe wages w [ w*,
and so the consistency condition (that beliefs be derived from Bayes rule) places no
constraint on beliefs.

7 Oligopoly
In this section, we characterize the pooling equilibria in an oligopoly. Of course,
there may be separating equilibria too. But we focus the analysis of pooling
equilibria for four reasons.
1.

2.

3.

4.

The ﬁrst is ‘‘analytic’’: we want to know whether the set of parameters for
which there exists a pooling equilibrium shrinks as the number of ﬁrms
decreases; since there is no anger in pooling equilibria, this would establish that
the ‘‘chances’’ of anger appearing are larger when there is less competition.
´
The second reason for focusing on pooling equilibria is ‘‘historic’’: in Peron’s
speeches there is a reference to the possibility that capitalism works well in
some circumstances (for example, there is a reference to this ‘‘calmness’’ in the
speech of May 1st, 1945). This ‘‘benchmark’’ case, from which the local elites
have departed, is represented as a pooling equilibrium.
The third is to avoid making choices that would need to be made, and that,
however, we resolved them, would leave some readers unsatisﬁed. Take for
example, the following. In a separating equilibrium, workers are angry at some
ﬁrms; when they are, the optimal wage by the ﬁrms is higher (than if they are
not); this leads to a larger material utility for workers. This leaves us with the
conundrum that selﬁsh ﬁrms are giving to their employees a higher material
utility, and yet they are angry. This begs the question: are workers (in reality,
not in the model) angry because the ﬁrm is selﬁsh, or because the ﬁrm acts in
ways that harms its employees? Put differently, would you be angry at
somebody you know is nasty, but is temporarily pretending to be nice (not
because he is trying to change, but just to avoid some punishment)?
Psychological research has not answered this question in a satisfactory manner
yet.
The ﬁnal reason is tractability: in a separating equilibrium, when there are many
ﬁrms, the patterns of combinations of ﬁrms becomes complicated (a selﬁsh ﬁrm
surrounded by two selﬁsh ﬁrms, or by one selﬁsh and one altruistic, or by two
altruistic, etc.; similarly for an altruistic ﬁrm and its neighbors). In ex-ante
terms, though, each ﬁrm does not know whether its neighbors will be of one

8 Pooling equilibria
Our ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the necessary conditions under which a wage wo is part of a
pooling equilibrium, in which workers attain their target level of utility. Consider a
ﬁrm which maximizes proﬁts in a deviation from a pooling equilibrium with wage
wo (we are not including a utility cost of the deviating ﬁrm, since we assume for the
time being that the equilibrium is such that workers attain their target utility level s).
If the ﬁrm increases its wage, workers won& be angry. In that case, labor supply is
t
given by the sum of all (unit) supplies of workers who are closer to the deviating
ﬁrm than the two types of workers (one to each side) who are indifferent between
working for the ﬁrm we are analyzing and working for its neighbor:
w À s À x ¼ wo À s À ðb À xÞ , S ¼ 2x ¼ b þ w À wo :
Proﬁts are then
ðp À wÞðb þ w À wo Þ:
When the ﬁrm maximizes this expression, we obtain an optimal wage of
w¼

p þ w À b
:
2

For the ﬁrm not to want to deviate from wo, it must be the case that this optimal
wage is lower than wo, or equivalently
w¼

p þ w À b
2

w , p À b

w :

ð1Þ

In other words, if the oligopoly wage is too low, the ﬁrms are better off
increasing their wage, and so workers will not punish them (by getting angry). If the
ﬁrm lowers its wage, consumers become angry, and labor supply is given by the
condition that
w À s À x À kðp À wÞ ¼ w À s À ðb À xÞ , S ¼ b þ ð1 þ kÞw À kp À w :
In that case, proﬁts are
ðp À wÞðb þ ð1 þ kÞw À kp À w Þ:
For the ﬁrm not to want to deviate and offer the optimal wage in this deviation,
w¼

w À b þ pð1 þ 2kÞ
ðb À w þ pÞ2
)p¼
2ð 1 þ kÞ
4ð1 þ kÞ

it must be the case that proﬁts in the equilibrium are larger than these deviation

ðb À w þ pÞ2
) w
4ð1 þ kÞ

6

h
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃi
p À b 1 þ 2k À 2 kð1 þ kÞ :

ð2Þ

Notice that when k = 0 (the standard Salop case), we obtain from (1) and (2)
wo ¼ p À b:
Equations (1) and (2) provide two constraints to the equilibrium wage wo. The
third and ﬁnal restriction is that for a given s, as we decrease the number of ﬁrms,
the wage must also increase to achieve the target utility. Worker utility (in a pooling
equilibrium with wage wo) is the number of ﬁrms, 1/b, times the total utility of
workers hired by each ﬁrm:
Z b
2 2 
b
ðw À s À xÞdx ¼ w À s À
b 0
4
This utility is larger than s if and only if
w À s À

b
b
! s , w ! s þ s þ
4
4

ð3Þ

We now present one important result: as competition decreases (enough), anger
is more likely. The following proposition shows that as competition decreases, a
pooling equilibrium is less likely. But since pooling equilibria have no anger, and
separating equilibria do (in expected terms there will be some selﬁsh ﬁrms), when
pooling equilibria disappear, anger appears.
Proposition 1 There is a critical n* such that for all n0 [ n C n*, the set of
pooling wages is smaller when there are n ﬁrms than when there are n0 . That is, as
competition decreases, anger is more likely.
Proof

Deﬁne b* so that Eqs. (3) and (1) hold with equality and are equated:
sþsþ

bÃ
4
¼ p À bÃ , bÃ ¼ ðp À s À sÞ:
5
4

Let n* = 1/b*. For b* [ b the set of equilibrium wages is increasing in
b (decreasing in n) because: Eq. (3) is not binding; the slope of (2) is smaller (in
absolute value) than the slope of (1).
h
The plot below illustrates the three constraints on wo imposed by Eqs. 1–3. The
wage wo must lie between the two loci with negative slopes (the ﬂatter one is Eq. 2
and the steeper, 1) which arise from the ﬁrms’ incentives not to deviate. The wage

condition that fewer ﬁrms imply higher wages if workers are to obtain their target
utilities).

Next, we present another relevant result, connecting the productivity of ﬁrms, the
rise in anger and the possible subsequent regulation. This result provides a potential
explanation for why people in less developed countries do not like capitalism. If
productivity is lower and more volatile in LDCs, that would explain why capitalists
and capitalism are not popular.
Proposition 2 When productivity decreases, or when it becomes more volatile,
anger is more likely.
Proof When productivity decreases, the two loci of Eqs. (2) and (1) move
downwards by the amount of the decrease in productivity. Since Eq. (3) is
unchanged, the set of pooling equilibrium wages shrinks.
A larger volatility in productivities makes it more likely that a low (pooling
breaking) cost will happen, and then the selﬁsh ﬁrms will reveal themselves as such,
and anger will arise.
h
An interesting point to note is that higher variability in productivity in LDCs
could be the consequence of higher regulations to begin with: ﬁrms in sectors with a
comparative advantage could have higher worker productivities, while ﬁrms in
protected sectors lower productivities (even considering government regulations to
protect them). In a sense, then, Peronism, by introducing distortions, generates anger
towards capitalists and perpetuates the beliefs that Peronism fostered.
The next result illustrates another obvious feature of the rise in anger: when for
some exogenous reason workers become ‘‘captive’’ of one particular ﬁrm, anger is
more likely. The mechanism is as one would expect: when worker& labor elasticity
s

temptation may be large enough that an anger-triggering wage decrease may be
proﬁtable. In countries with concentrated industries, like Argentina, and with little
inter-industry mobility, workers do not have mobility, and so elasticity of supply is
lower.
We model this increase in captivity by changing the cost of re-converting to
another industry, while keeping rival& wages ﬁxed. The reason for this assumption is
s
simple: if it is suddenly harder for workers employed in ﬁrm i to work in ﬁrm i - 1
or i ? 1, those ﬁrms will keep their wages ﬁxed: if they did not wish to attract the
marginal worker before the change in re-conversion costs, they don& want to after,
t
so there is no incentive to raise wages; if ﬁrm i-1 did not want to lower its wage
before the change in costs, they don& want to do so after, since the incentives of the
t
marginal worker working for them have not changed. As will become transparent in
the proof, an equivalent way of modeling this is assuming that the two neighbors of
the ﬁrm being analyzed move farther away, as if there had been a decrease in the
number of ﬁrms.
Proposition 3 Assume that, for a given parameter conﬁguration, there is a
pooling equilibrium with a wage of wo. If the cost of re-converting to ﬁrms i - 1 or
i ? 1 increases from 1 to t [ 1, but the cost to ﬁrm i remains constant, the ﬁrm’s
incentives to decrease its wage increase. There is a threshold t* such that if t C t*,
ﬁrm i lowers its wage and workers become angry.
Proof When the cost of converting to ﬁrms i - 1 and i ? 1 increases to t, the
supply faced by ﬁrm i (after an anger-triggering decrease in wage) and its proﬁts,
are
S¼2

w À w þ ðw À pÞk þ bt
w À w þ ðw À pÞk þ bt
) p ¼ ðp À wÞ2
tþ1
tþ1

and the optimal wage and proﬁt are
w¼

p À w þ 2pk À bt
ðp À w þ btÞ2
)p¼
:
2ð k þ 1Þ
2ðk þ 1Þðt þ 1Þ

Notice that in the equation for the optimal wage, an increase in t is equivalent to
an increase in b: a fall in the number of ﬁrms. For large enough t, these proﬁts
exceed the oligopoly proﬁt, and the ﬁrm lowers its wage, causing anger. QED
In the above proposition we have assumed that workers continue to make
inferences based on the equilibrium prior to the shock. Although one could argue
that a new equilibrium (one with fewer ﬁrms or with higher t) should be the
benchmark, we believe that keeping the old equilibrium beliefs is also plausible. In
addition, the case of fewer ﬁrms also leads to more anger, as established by
Proposition 1.
The previous proposition may be particularly relevant for the rise of Peronism
and Peronist beliefs. In a time of rising speed of technological change, the cost of re´

a consequence of the increasing exploitation by ﬁrms that had gained more power
over their workers.
Any wage wo in the range determined by Eqs. (1) and (2) can be part of a pooling
equilibrium if we choose s or a appropriately. Note that if the ﬁrm is altruistic and it
lowers its wage enough, there could be a utility cost of providing workers with a
very low level of utility. Since we found necessary conditions, we focused only on
the incentives of the selﬁsh ﬁrm. When we want to build an equilibrium with a wage
wo within the range we have just identiﬁed, we need to take into account this utility
cost for the altruistic ﬁrm. But choosing s or a low enough, any one of these wages
is part of an equilibrium. We do not elaborate, because the construction is simple.

9 A brief discussion of policies in this model
The model above describes a pooling equilibrium in an oligopoly without anger.
Although consumers are not angry, anger can arise if for whatever reason the
pooling equilibrium is broken. In particular, the scenario we have in mind is that the
arrival of Peron coincided with the rise in anger that led to a separating equilibrium,
and the rise in anger.16
In this model there are three channels through which regulation (setting minimum
wages and making a transfer to the ﬁrm) affects welfare. First, there is the standard
channel: a minimum wage larger than market wages, but still below productivity
increases total welfare by attracting workers to the ﬁrm (to produce something worth
p at a cost in terms of lost leisure and transportation cost of less than p). A second, quite
direct and simple channel is through the reduction in anger: since an increase in wages
lowers ﬁrms’ proﬁts, and total anger depends on the size of proﬁts, a rise in wages
reduces anger and increases welfare. Finally, any channel that reduces anger (whether
it increases wages or not) induces workers to start working, and that further increases
welfare. The second channel does not depend on individuals changing behavior; this
third channel arises because workers re-optimize. Imagine for example, a policy that
keeps wages at their pre-policy levels, but ‘‘expropriates’’ the proﬁts from the ﬁrm
(through a ﬁne, for example). In that case, in the standard model, welfare would be
unchanged. In the current model, welfare increases for two reasons: ﬁrst, each worker
who was employed is happier, but some who were not working will now enter the
workforce and become available at the ﬁned ﬁrm.
Intuition and some simple calculations show that in this model the appeal of ﬁnes
to the ﬁrms and other ‘‘populist’’ policies increases relative to their appeal in a
setting where anger plays no role (that is k = 0). To illustrate, imagine that a policy
with wage w and transfer T [ 0 to the ﬁrm is slightly better in terms of total welfare
(in a standard model with no anger) to the policy (w, T = 0). In the model with
anger, when consumers are angry, the second policy that ‘‘beats on the ﬁrm’’ is
preferred, since it reduces the amount of anger. This is an example of a policy that
16

We refer the interested reader to Di Tella and Dubra (2014) for an analysis of the separating equilibria.
Under certain parameter conditions (for example, when skills are not easily transferred in going from one
ﬁrm to another), the oligopoly results in a series of local monopsonies. The discussion of policies in this

looks bad in a standard model (a bad ‘‘populist’’ policy), but that is potentially
welfare enhancing when emotions are taken into account. Although we don’t claim
that all of the bad Argentine policies are driven by attention to emotions, we believe
that there is at least some truth to the idea that policies that are bad for long run
material growth may be optimal when workers (or consumers more generally) are
angry at certain business sectors.

10 Conclusion
´
A school of thought exempliﬁed by Dıaz Alejandro (1970, 1988) suggests that
Argentina’s relative decline is associated with the abandonment of laissez faire in
favor of interventionist policies (see also Cortes Conde 1997 and Taylor 1994).
Since voters actively demand these policies, a paradox in this explanation is that
individuals act rationally when it comes to goods markets, but irrationally when it
comes to voting. In this article we describe a set of beliefs and values that makes
´
Peron and his followers desire these policies, sometimes because of an incomplete
understanding of their consequences, and sometimes because their objective
exceeds the immediate material outcome (for example, they demand ‘‘fairness’’ in
labor relations). In the latter case, voters are rational and demand ‘‘bad policies’’
(from the narrow perspective of maximizing material payoffs).
It is worth noting that a central observation in Argentina’s relative decline is that it
was accompanied by a strong reduction in private investment: from the formidable
rates of capital accumulation pre-1913 ﬁnanced primarily by foreigners to the dismal
´
later performance. Dıaz Alejandro (1970) and Taylor (1994) have emphasized the low
savings rate and the high relative price of capital goods pre 1960. Naturally, it is
possible that the decline in investment is connected to the country’s populist tradition,
which helped spread interventionist policies and fueled political instability.
Argentina’s relative decline is visible in the 1930s and appears to accelerate in the
1970s. These two periods coincide with political instability: 1930 is the year of the ﬁrst
of several military coups and marks the beginning of the ‘‘infamous’’ decade that
´
would set the stage for the ﬁrst Peron administration; while the 1970s is marked by the
armed conﬂict involving left wing guerrillas and the military (and paramilitary) forces
´
which led to the military coup of 1976. Indeed, following Peron’s ascent to the labor
secretary in 1943, Peronism has been the preeminent political force in the country,
leading many to assume that no government could succeed without its explicit support.
´
One reason for its enduring legacy is that Peron’s more interventionist policies were in
tune with the times: after the 1930s, the increased presence of the State in the economy
was the norm, both in Argentina and in other countries.
But there are other factors that have made Peronist policies attractive to voters for
such a long period of time, even if they have contributed to its relative material
decline. In this paper we focus on three elements that help us throw light on the
nature of Peronist policies and their enduring signiﬁcance. First, we study beliefs
´
and values about the economic system present in Peron’s speeches during the period
´
1943–55. We emphasize that Peron is concerned with the income generating
´

exploitation. Indeed, whereas economists have emphasized the role of luck versus
individual effort in the determination of income and how beliefs about their relative
impact can affect the economic system (see, for example, Piketty 1995), it seems
´
that Peron is focused on the inﬂuence of actors (elites, foreigners) and how they can
willfully change the income of Argentines (as in Di Tella and MacCulloch 2009).
This provides one possible explanation why the process of policymaking might be
less a rational learning process, such as the one described in Buera et al. (2011), but
instead an attempt to reveal intentions (which by their very nature are hard to verify)
and a search for culprits. There are also a large number of references to the idea that
labor relations can have non-monetary dimensions, and the speeches connect
exploitation to this ‘‘non-material’’ dimension. This (trivially) explains why markets
that are interpreted (and regulated) in this way may perform poorly (from a material
standpoint).
Second, we study survey data for the 1990s on the beliefs of Peronist and nonPeronist voters in Argentina and Democrat and Republican voters in the US. While
Peronists have low income and education relative to the opposition (so that they
look like the US democrats), their beliefs and values suggest that Peronists are the
Argentine equivalent of the Republicans. For example, whereas all respondents in
Argentina tend to believe that the poor are unlucky rather than lazy, Peronists (just
like Republicans in the US) are somewhat more inclined than the opposition (e.g.,
non-Peronists) to believe that the poor are Lazy. In other words, while the
´
opposition to Peron during 1943–55 came from the conservatives, the opposition to
Peronism in the 1990s comes from the left of the ideological spectrum. It is worth
reiterating that in both periods, the Peronists seem to have lower income and
educational achievement than the opposition. This suggests, at the very least, that
the Peronists are changing less in terms of political ideology than the opposition.
´
Finally, given that the meaning and beliefs conveyed by Peron in his speeches are
non-standard (for economists), we present a model formalizing the possibility that
they are sub-optimal from a narrow material perspective, but that they may be
associated with improved well-being (for example, they reduce anger at aspects of
economic organization). In particular, we present a formal model of ‘‘exploitation’’
in the labor market where agents derive pleasure from treating well (badly) those
that have behaved well (badly) towards them. Firms are of two types: one is a
standard ﬁrm which might ‘‘exploit’’ the worker by paying him/her the minimum
possible wage, whereas the other type ‘‘cares’’ for the worker. Even with few
‘‘altruistic’’ ﬁrms, the equilibrium might involve no exploitation, as long as there is
sufﬁcient amount of competition. With monopsony power, the ‘‘good’’ equilibria
break down and there is scope for regulation that generates ﬁrst order welfare gains
(beyond Harberger triangles). We note that a ﬁrm might be exploiting workers even
if it is paying the same wage as other ﬁrms, as long as workers believe this ﬁrm is
doing it out of ‘‘unkindness’’ (formalized as reciprocal altruism).
Lat Am Econ Rev (2018) 27:6
DOI 10.1007/s40503-017-0046-5

Some elements of Peronist beliefs and tastes
Rafael Di Tella1 • Juan Dubra2

Received: 28 July 2017 / Revised: 15 September 2017 / Accepted: 28 September 2017
Ó The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication

Abstract We study the beliefs and values of Peronism. Instead of a comprehensive
approach, we focus on three elements. First, we study beliefs and values about the
economic system present in Peron’s speeches during the period 1943–55. Second,
given that these beliefs are non-standard (for economists), we present two models
formalizing some of the key aspects (for example, the idea that there is something
more than a material exchange in labor relations). Third, we study survey data for
the 1990s on the beliefs of Peronist and non-Peronist voters in Argentina and
Democrat and Republican voters in the US. While income and education suggest
that Peronists (in relative terms) look like the Democrats, their beliefs and values
suggest that Peronists are the Argentine equivalent of the Republicans.
Keywords Populism Á Altruism Á Exploitation
JEL Classiﬁcation J42 Á D64 Á L4

´
We thank Esteban Aranda for suggestions and exceptional research assistance, and Andres Velasco for
introducing us to Acario Cotapos. We also thank Juan Carlos Torre, Torcuato Di Tella, Lucas Llach, as
well as participants at the Argentine Exceptionalism seminar in Cambridge 2009, for helpful comments
and discussions. For support, Di Tella thanks the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
& Rafael Di Tella
rditella@hbs.edu
1

Harvard University and NBER, Cambridge, USA

2


1 Introduction
´
In a seminal study, Dıaz Alejandro (1970) blamed Argentina’s relative decline to
the replacement of the export-oriented, market friendly policies of the early 1900s
by populist, interventionist policies around the time of the great depression. While
other authors have claimed that lower growth rates had already begun before the
change in policies, Taylor (1994) has demonstrated that any ‘‘early retardation’’
accelerates after 1929, and again after 1950, with the onset of ineffective
government intervention. In this account Argentina’s relative decline during the
20th century can be attributed, broadly, to economically inefﬁcient ‘‘populist’’
policies supplied by leaders who often exploit a mass of uneducated, poor voters.
Peron and his followers play a prominent role in such narratives of Argentina’s
exceptional underperformance. Of course, there are some variations in the basic
account. For example, it is often claimed that policymaking, even during relatively
centrist administrations, was complicated enormously by the presence of a populist
party demanding government intervention. But in the end, in this account (the
‘‘Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis’’, for short), the key problem is Argentina’s populist
tradition, which has fueled bad policies and political instability.
A troubling aspect of this account, however, is that it does not explain why voters
ﬁnd populist policies appealing. As stated, this narrative soon has to conclude that
democracy is not a reasonable way to elect the country’s leaders, and it is of some
relevance that many Argentine conservatives ended up supporting military coups.
Paradoxically, this narrative implicitly questions the very beneﬁts that can be
expected from free markets. The reason is that it maintains that the rational
judgment of market participants cannot really be trusted (in political settings).
Indeed, humans in this account must have some type of dual type of rationality: on
the one hand they are able to make a reasonable use of information so that markets
for goods and services are in fact quite efﬁcient, but on the other hand they are
unable to see that the leaders they elect are bad for them. Rationality in DiazAlejandro’s account of democratic capitalism is a bit like the Cheshire cat of Alice
in Wonderland: now you see it, now you don’t.
We structure this paper around the basic Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis (i.e., the
view that Argentina’s relative decline is caused by the government’s supply of bad
policies), but complement it by providing a theory of the demand for such ‘‘bad’’
policies. The evidence we gather suggests two peculiarities of populist beliefs: they
are often wrong (for example, they involve unrealistic expectations concerning the
inﬂationary costs of printing money); and they often reveal a distrust of market
outcomes (markets result, for example, in ‘‘unfair’’ prices and wages). An
implication of such beliefs is that voters can demand policies that lead to a decline
in output, even when this is fully anticipated (because these policies are expected to
bring about more ‘‘fairness’’). In brief, an alternative title for our paper is ‘‘The
Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis with rational voters’’.
The school of thought associated with Diaz Alejandro has sometimes been
interpreted as suggesting that markets are good for growth. Thus, a policy is deemed

classiﬁes policies as ‘‘bad’’ only when they clearly lead to unsustainable
macroeconomic imbalances. Beyond some extreme cases, it is often difﬁcult to
agree on what makes a policy clearly unsustainable. For example, it is simply not
obvious that populism is necessarily associated with unsustainable declines in
investment. Theoretically, it is possible that Peron’s redistributive policies put
enough money in the hands of workers to spur consumption. This, in turn, might
provide a promising enough internal market to compensate investors for any
political instability that populism might generate. And empirically, the evidence on
the effect of populism on total investment is mixed, as we shall see (although there
is some evidence of a negative effect when the focus is only private investment).
Perhaps a more attractive version of the Diaz-Alejandro hypothesis assigns
Argentina’s relative decline to the bottlenecks in foreign trade (produced by
excessive aversion to trade with other countries), the large ﬁscal imbalances
(produced by an underestimation of the costs of inﬂation) and the instability that
some of Peron’s redistributive policies induced. In some cases, the negative effect of
these policies was unanticipated by voters. But in other cases, agents understood the
material costs, but were seeking outcomes that appeared more ‘‘fair’’ to them.1
Economists have not made signiﬁcant progress in understanding Latin American
populism because they tend to ﬁnd the interest group theory of policy quite
compelling. In the standard account, bad policies are put in place by special interests
and voters would get rid of them if only they cared to vote or were able to organize.
Interestingly, however, voters do vote in large numbers (by and large, voting is
compulsory in Latin America), so the empirical appeal of the interest group theory
of policy formation, at least in its simplest form, appears low. A more promising
approach accepts that populist policies are in fact appealing to (at least some group
of) voters, perhaps because they do not fully understand their implications, as
argued in Dornbusch and Edwards (1991). These authors point out several instances
were policymakers in populist governments espouse views that would not be
standard in economics.2
Our analysis begins with a brief section on the historical and political background
of Peronist policies (Sect. 2). It then contains three substantive parts. In the ﬁrst,
(Sect. 3), we use qualitative data from Peron’s early speeches (1944–55) to provide
some evidence on Peron’s beliefs (i.e., positive descriptions of how the world
1

It would still be important to explain why the adherence to these policies in the late 1960s, when the
costs were becoming increasingly clear. One possible answer is that there was insufﬁcient trust between
the private and public sectors to exchange vital information about Pareto improving policies. Di Tella and
Dubra (2013) study how legitimacy of the private sector can positively inﬂuence policymaking through
the exchange of information.

2

They deﬁne populism as involving a belief in ‘‘no constraints’’: The risks of deﬁcit ﬁnance emphasized
in traditional thinking are portrayed as exaggerated or altogether unfounded. According to populist
policymakers, (monetary) expansion is not inﬂationary (if there is no devaluation) because spare capacity
and decreasing long-run costs contain cost pressures and there is always room to squeeze proﬁt margins
by price controls. (Page 9.) This can be contrasted with other deﬁnitions of populism emphasizing the
connection to socialism (e.g., Coniff 1982) or the one in Drake (1982), which focuses on political
mobilizations, the emphasis on rhetoric and the use of symbols that ‘‘inspire’’ voters. It is interesting to
note that those in charge of economic policy in Argentina were often less heterodox (as documented, for

works) and preferences (i.e., normative values describing how the world should
work). These speeches suggest to us three simple but important points. First, Peron’s
policies were known to his voters (in contrast to later Peronist presidents, such as
Carlos Menem in the 1990’s, who was elected on a platform but changed it upon
being elected). Second, what Peron is doing in the speeches, at least in part, is
providing ‘‘meaning’’ by interpreting the evidence available in the light of (what we
would call) a coherent model of the world. Although such ‘‘interpretation’’ is
unusual in economic models, it is often discussed by scholars who study beliefs (and
in ‘‘discourse analysis’’). The third and ﬁnal element in his speeches that we
emphasize is that Peron gives a prominent role to the forces that determine income.
In contrast to what the literature on varieties of capitalism has emphasized in terms
´
of the origins of income (distinguishing between effort versus luck), Peron
emphasizes the role of others in determining (reducing) our income through
exploitation. This emphasis results in a focus on actors (foreign countries and rich
local elites, whose center of vital interests was Europe rather than Argentina).3 And
in a focus on distinguishing the components of welfare: there are utility losses from
being ‘‘exploited’’, which go beyond the material losses (losing one’s dignity).
´
In the second substantive part (Sect. 4), we study Peronist beliefs after Peron’s
death and place them in comparative perspective by looking at data from the World
Values Survey in the 1990s. Respondents that declare an intention to vote for
Peronism are also those that are on low income and have low educational attainment
(relative to the middle class: these surveys do not sample those at the top of the
´
income distribution). This is consistent with our analysis of Peron’s speeches of the
1944–55 period, which appear to be on the left side of the political spectrum, and
with speciﬁc events of that period (the burning of the Jockey Club, the antiAmerican slogans, etc.).4 Our results suggest that most Argentine voters are on the
left of the political spectrum (relative to voters in the US), but that, surprisingly,
within Argentina, Peronist beliefs tend to be more on the right of the political
spectrum relative to those of the opposition. In relative terms, Peronist beliefs in the
1990s appear to be similar to Republican beliefs. In other words, the opposition to
´
Peron seems to have come from the conservatives while the opposition to the
Peronists in the 1990s seems to have come from the ideological left (although in
both periods the opposition seems to have been on higher income than the
Peronists). Put differently, what appears to be exceptional in Argentina is that the
middle class is ideologically to the left of those at the bottom of the income
distribution.
In the ﬁnal substantive section (Sect. 5) we develop a model to explain a low
‘‘demand for capitalism’’. If voters maximize something else than just their material
3

One of the Spanish words for ‘‘traitor’’ is ‘‘vendepatrias’’ (literally ‘‘seller of the motherland’’). Acario
Cotapos, a Chilean artist, once commented on the possibility of selling the motherland, adding ‘‘yes, and
let’s buy something smaller, but closer to Paris’’. Betrayal by the oligarchy during the decade prior to
´
´
Peron’s ﬁrst government is emphasized, for example, in Torres (1973) and Hernandez Arregui (1973).

4

Indeed, a small literature on the subject has claimed that Peronism is the local version of the American
Democrats or the British Labour Party. However, we can investigate the beliefs of these Peronist voters
with respect to the origins of income (e.g., luck vs effort) and compare them with those of American

payoff, then even with correct beliefs about how the world works they may demand
bad policies (from the narrow point of view of maximizing income). A voter
concerned with the fairness of outcomes is a case in point. Speciﬁcally, we assume
that voters demand that ﬁrms behave kindly (and this must be true in some
scenarios). When they do not, voters experience anger. Such anger can be expected
to fall when selﬁsh ﬁrms are punished. In Argentina ﬁrms are more likely to
misbehave than in rich countries (perhaps because of low competition or because of
low productivity), so the State must intervene (‘‘regulate to humanize Capital’’).
Section 6 concludes.

2 Peron, interventionist policies and argentine politics: background
Political instability and economic uncertainty coincide with the onset of Argentina’s
relative decline. By 1930, a military coup by a conservative group with fascist
inclinations resulted in the ﬁrst military government of the country. With the world
crisis as context, ad hoc inward looking, import substitution policies were adopted.
The succession of non-democratic governments that followed (seven) included
´
episodes of serious violence and resulted in the presidency of Peron 1946. Since
1930 and until the Menem administration of the 1990s, no democratic president was
´
able to complete its term, with the exception of the ﬁrst Peron government. This
coincided with Argentina’s economic woes. Indeed, Argentina’s comparative
economic performance (see Fig. 1 in Glaeser, Di Tella and Llach of this volume)
reveals two periods were divergence appears to be present: the period leading to the
crisis of the 1930s, when the series appears to begin to fall (with some exceptions),
and the 1970s, another period of heavy political instability, when the decline
appears to accelerate.
This suggests that, at least at this broad level of generality, there is some
merit to the hypothesis that political instability and relative economic decline

Investment/GDP
0.26
0.195
I/GDP

0.13
0.065
0.
1875

1950

2025


are positively correlated. Interestingly, the rate of investment during 1930–40
(the ‘‘infamous decade’’) appears low (9.1%), particularly when compared with
the rate prevailing during the decade prior to the start of the First World War
(19.3%), one of the periods where the government was in the hands of ‘‘elitist’’
governments and the economy was relatively open to international trade (see,
Gerchunoff and Llach 1998). Figure 1 reveals that investment over GDP rises
with Peronism, with an increasingly larger role taken by public investment
(whereas in the early years it is mainly private investment; still, it is a matter
of debate whether the increased investment helped growth, since it is unclear if
public investment was efﬁcient) until the ﬁscal crisis of the early 1980s.5 A
simple hypothesis suggested by the data is that political instability causes
lower private investment, and that this is a cause of Argentina’s relative
decline.
Several authors have emphasized the role of investment in Argentina’s relative
´
decline. Dıaz Alejandro (1970, 1988), for example, has focused on the difﬁculties in
maintaining high levels of investment once the export-oriented, market friendly
regime was replaced by the more interventionist regimes that follow the great
depression. Taylor (1994) also emphasizes the role of the pre 1913 extremely high
rates of capital accumulation, explaining how subsequent protectionist policies
resulted in a high relative price of imported capital goods, and that this contributed
to retarding capital accumulation (for evidence on the role of machinery investment
in growth, see De Long and Summers 1991). A natural extension of this line of
research is that political instability plays a similar role interfering with private
investment and contributing to Argentina’s decline. Of course, then, a key question
is why do these interventionist policies get implemented, and why does political
instability persist.
Several authors have emphasized the role of Peronism in Argentina’s develop´
ment.6 Since General Peron’s ascent to the Labor Secretariat in 1943 (with the
Military Government of General Ramirez), he was the preeminent political ﬁgure of
Argentina. Even after his death, policies have been deﬁned with relation to the
Peronist political legacy (see, for example, O’Donnell 1977 and Portantiero 1973).
Several hypotheses have been advanced to explain the causes of Peronist support. A
´
simple fact is that Peron adopted a series of policies that favored organized labor at
a time when the country was shifting towards light manufacturing (see, for example,
the analysis in Gerchunoff 1989). During this period, the share of output accounted
for by industry increased signiﬁcantly and labor became a central economic and
political force in the country. Thus, Peronist pro-labor policies in a context of
increasing importance of Labor go a long way in explaining its popular support,
even if voters only had material concerns. Some authors estimate that the real wage
for unskilled labor in the Buenos Aires area increased by 17% per year during this
5

For an alternative view of the investment performance, see Taylor (1998).

6

There is, of course, a large literature on Argentina’s economic performance and on the role played by
Peronism which is in no way summarized or reviewed in the short paragraphs offered here as context for
the relatively narrow set of points we emphasize. For a description of economic policies under the
´
´
1946–55 Peron government, see Gerchunoff (1989). See also Dıaz Alejandro (1970), Cortes Conde

period.7 It is unclear how much of this increase was sustainable, however, even in
the presence of economies of scale and higher proﬁt margins, as the internal market
expanded and import substitution became widespread (see Galiani and Somaini, this
volume). It is worth pointing out that anti-export policies also contributed to the
increase in real wages through lower prices of food (see Brambilla, Galiani and
Porto, this volume).
A less obvious cause for peronist support concerns labor reallocation. It appears
that the changing economic structure of the country involved signiﬁcant labor
migration, and that this generated new political demands. Germani (1962), for
example, has emphasized the emotional fragility of internal migrants (from the
´
provinces) and the charismatic, paternal nature of Peron’s leadership. He provides
an estimate of 83,000 migrants per year to the greater Buenos Aires area for the
period 1936–47, increasing thereafter. By 1957, Germani estimates a doubling of
the population in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area (form 3.4 to 6.3 million), so
this was a signiﬁcant phenomenon. Besides policies that directly supported labor, a
variety of social programs in different areas were put in place, ranging from
increased access to free health care, to the creation of a comprehensive housing
program and the establishment of a generous system of social security (for a good
description see, for example, Gaggero and Garro 2009). There was also the real and
´
´
symbolic role of the Eva Peron Foundation—a private entity run by Peron’s wife—
funded through contributions from the private and public entities, and which
distributed considerable amounts of social assistance (see Stawski 2005).
At the same time, institutional weaknesses contributed to the limited political
response to the country’s economic problems. Some have singled out speciﬁc
aspects, such as electoral institutions giving preeminence to the party in the decision
to re-elect politicians (see Jones et al. 2002). Others have emphasized the political
institutions that allowed unexpected changes in economic policy (see, for example,
´
Spiller and Tommasi 2005). Although electoral fraud preceded Peron, it may have
lent some legitimacy to the abuses of the Peronist regime (see, for example, Gallo
and Alston 2009). Naturally, the ability to protect the rights to property under weak
institutions was limited, and there is the possibility that this, and unexpected
changes in economic policy (or the risk of such changes), led to a weaker
investment performance (see, for example, Adelman 1999, Cortes Conde 1997, and
Gallo and Alston 2009).8 Consistent with this, there was less access to external
capital after the great depression (see Taylor, 1994). And foreign direct investment
´
fell in importance, albeit from very high levels (Dıaz Alejandro 1970 reports that
foreigners’ share of the stock of capital in 1927 was 34%, down from 48% prior to
the First World War).

7

See Murmis and Portantiero (1971). On the role of the support of socialist trade unions, see Torre
(1989). See also Horowitz (1990), Di Tella (2003) and Torre (1990), as well as O’Donnell (1977) and the
contributions collected in Brennan (1998) and Miguens and Turner (1988).

8

Saiegh (2013) makes the reasonable point that, even during the early market-friendly phase following
the passing of the liberal constitution in 1853/60, the security of some rights to property (for example, on
public debt) depended on political considerations such as the extent of partisan control over the

A somewhat different picture emerges from the period leading to the Peronist
administration of the 1970s. The relatively closed economy of the 1960s
experienced difﬁculties adjusting to economic expansions as increased imports
often led to balance of payments crises and inﬂation. Against this background, and
with the political proscription of Peronism, attempts at using wage and income
policies to stabilize the economy were unsuccessful. There were several attempts to
reduce wage pressure, typically by restricting trade unions (for example, the
Ongania government imposed a wage freeze, attempted to increase working hours,
limited labor strikes and suspended the legal status of several trade unions).
Tensions soon fuelled the presence of left wing elements, and ﬁghting communism
´
became a serious government concern. As riots erupted in Cordoba, left wing
terrorism became a political force with some legitimacy (given the lack of
democracy) and a claim to membership in the Peronist ‘‘movement’’. There is some
´
evidence that Peron himself encouraged this identiﬁcation with the left.9 During the
1970s, kidnappings and assassinations reached their peak, as the terrorist
organizations (the Marxist People’s Revolutionary Army and the Montoneros—of
Peronist extraction) clashed with the police and armed forces (see the data on the
assassination of policemen in the province of Buenos Aires in Boruchowicz and
Wagner 2013). Eventually, in the 1970s, with the terrorist organizations still active
´
after Peron’s return to the country’s presidency, he broke with them in a dramatic
speech, ejecting them from the Plaza de Mayo. Thus, in contrast to the early years,
when Peronism arrived and launched a true workers’ movement opposed to the
´
Conservatives, during the 1970s at least part of the opposition to Peron seems to
have come from the ideological left. The survey data reported later are consistent
with this description.
´
In brief, it seems clear that Peron’s arrival on the political scene in the 1940s
coincided with the increased importance of labor in Argentina’s economy, and a
reduced importance of openness to foreign capital and trade as the global economy
´
was affected by the war and the Great Depression. Accordingly, Peron’s ideology
reﬂected a degree of nationalism and faith in government intervention that would
persist over time. The Peronist opposition, however, seems to have evolved from a
traditional conservative position to a position that is on the left of the political
spectrum.

´
3 Peron in his own words
´
Peron’s political legacy has long been a matter of controversy. A natural hypothesis
is that, given that he was a fascist sympathizer, his ideological legacy must simply
be fascism. This would answer the question of how bad policies (e.g., excessively
´
interventionist/expansionist) come to be implemented: Peron’s authoritarian rule
imposed such polices. For our purposes, the biggest problem with this argument is
9

´
For example, while in exile in Madrid, Peron appears to have designated John William Cooke, a man
who argued for ‘‘armed struggle’’ based on the Cuban model, as his main representative in the country.
´

that such policies appear to be popular with the electorate, and they continued to be
´
so even after Peron was deposed and the most egregious aspects of his authoritarian
rule (such as indoctrination) were no longer active.10 Note also that some elements
´
in Peron’s ideology have a different origin: the idea that government policy should
attempt to ‘‘humanize capital’’, for example, has conservative (and Christian) roots
and is present in the European Christian democrats. Furthermore, Peronism seems to
involve opinions about economic independence and policy interventions that are
central in socialism (and in other, less authoritarian political forms).
´
It is also of some signiﬁcance that Peron’s political ideology was developing in
the immediate aftermath of the First World War. Born in 1895, he was in his
twenties when the communist revolution took over Russia. He was 28-years-old at a
time when the Weimar republic was struggling with war reparations, and foreigners
became a convenient political scapegoat, together with bankers, Jews and
speculators. Thus, it is perhaps unsurprising that attribution (particularly to external
forces) plays a big role in his speeches. And he was 35 as the Great Depression
affected the world economy and rich countries were starting to cope relying on
public works programs and expanded government spending (in part linked to
rearmament). Perhaps even more signiﬁcantly, in 1935 one of the ﬁrst actions of the
newly created central bank was a bailout of the banking system at a large social cost
(della Paolera and Taylor 2002). Thus, it must have been clear to him that large
shocks could disrupt the macroeconomy to a very large extent, making individual
effort often irrelevant in the determination of income.
The Peronist regime of the 1940s and 50s accompanied the economic changes
that were implemented, ﬁrst from the Labor Secretariat and then from the
Presidency, with a powerful new rhetoric that gave workers a preeminent role in the
formation of policy. Keynesian solutions were becoming known, in part through
president Roosevelt’s actions, and some of these ideas were making their way to
Argentina.11 Rhetoric, of course, was only one element in a broad attempt to create
support for the social and political changes that would sustain the redistribution of
income at the core of Peronist policies. Other elements included a set of political
rituals linked to mass mobilization, the emotional appeal of Evita and a clear
attempt to inﬂuence people’s perceptions and beliefs through propaganda. Although
´
we study Peron’s speeches, we note that this might be a relatively narrow focus,
particularly given the discussion of these elements appearing in Plotkin (2003). Of
10

One difference with fascism, for example, is that trade union leaders were closer (more loyal) to
´
members of the union than to the government (perhaps in spite of Peron’s wishes). Also, there were
´
attempts at constructing ‘‘Peronism without Peron’’ and instances of trade union leaders who were
´
´
perceived to be quite independent of Peron (leading to the extreme view that Peron himself was involved
in the killing of trade union leader Vandor). And, most importantly, large increases in the Labor share of
GDP took place under Peronist administrations (for historical evidence and a comparison with Australia,
see Gerchunoff and Fajgelbaum 2006). See also Germani (1962) and Lewis (1980) for interesting
discussions.
11

´
Federico Pinedo and Luis Duhau, together with Raul Prebisch, put in place the Plan de Accion
´
Economica Nacional in 1933. They were inﬂuential in affecting foreign trade and in the creation of the
Argentine Central Bank in 1935. Della Paolera and Taylor (1999) describe heterodox monetary policy
after 1929, the change in beliefs and expectations following the shift in monetary regime and the

course, a potentially important determinant of beliefs is the education system, and
the Peronist regime heavily intervened in the design of the national curriculum and
´
the public schools system (see, for example, Bernetti and Puiggros 1993; Bianchi
´
1992; Escude 1990). A broader study of political ideas in Argentina appears in
Romero (1987).
´
Previous work in the ﬁeld of discourse analysis by Sigal and Veron (2003)
´
focused on Peron’s speeches.12 They analyze several aspects of his discourses and
put special emphasis on their political dimension. For example, Sigal and Veron put
´
forward the interesting hypothesis that Peron actively constructs the notion that he
‘‘arrives’’ to the State from the ‘‘outside’’ (e.g., a life dedicated to the military) to
provide unity/harmony to a divided country (during 1973–4, the main focus of their
analysis), which is signiﬁcant given some of the electoral decisions made at the
time. In contrast to this work, we focus on the economic dimension of his early
speeches.
´
It is possible to study Peron’s ideas through his books, particularly those written
´
in the context of the controversy with the American Ambassador (Peron 1946) or his
´
ﬁrst book following his exile (Peron 1958). Yet, the analysis of speeches is
important for at least three reasons. First, we are not sure how many people read his
books, while we know that participation in his rallies was massive. For example, an
´
estimate supplied by the ‘‘La Razon’’ newspaper put two million people attending a
´
´
Peron rally on August 22nd, 1951. Second, the subset of Peron’s ideas included in
his speeches presumably provides us with some sense of what he himself thought
´
would be well received by his voters. Finally, an important part of Peron’s ideas
were communicated through speeches at that time; books became more important
during exile.
The material we studied was contained in 62 speeches, delivered between
October 15th, 1944 and May 1st, 1953. They include a few speeches during rallies
(as reported in the media), some speeches during particular celebrations, as well as
messages to congress and other legislative bodies. It should be noted that there is
some variation in the content of the speeches, which can be traced back to the
changing economic circumstances (such as those made around the 1951–2 crisis
´
where Peron justiﬁes a less expansionary stance).
´
3.1 Peron’s speeches
The ﬁrst striking point (to an economist) of his speeches is their low informational
content. In contrast to what might be expected, they are not of the form: ‘‘I am
informing the people of Argentina that we are facing a shock with the following
characteristics, and here is what we are going to do about it.’’ In other words, they
are not predominantly exercises in the transmission of information. Rather, they are
heavily interpreted narratives of what has happened in the past, and how the
conclusions that we draw from looking at history can help us shape policy in the
12
There are several interesting cultural aspects of Peronism that we do not discuss, including the focus
on one date (October 17th), when Peronism ‘‘starts’’. For a discussion and several of the key details of the

present. In brief, a key element of the speeches is that they are primarily centered on
the reinterpretation of already available information. Also, scholars working on
analysis of discourse would say he is engaged in the ‘‘production of meaning’’. In
particular, such research is concerned with establishing the ‘‘source’s relationship to
the content’’ (related in this case to the source’s status). Under the assumption that
minds and memory are malleable in this way, an economist would have no problem
modeling it as a (self-interested) activity of the politician. An example is Glaeser
(2005), where politicians supply stories and voters fail to investigate their accuracy.
Finally, the speeches can also be interpreted as trying to inﬂuence the system of
values of the population. In this regard, Rokeach (1973) is an inﬂuential study of
value systems and their impact on behavior (also focusing, in part, on the writings of
major political ﬁgures). See also Converse (1964) and, for a recent review, Kinder
(1998).
´
The second, and perhaps key part of this ‘‘interpretation exercise’’, is that Peron
assumes the role of a heroic whistleblower, denouncing a corrupt state of affairs
where politicians are ‘‘bought’’ by one particular group in society (the economic and
cultural elite, who are seduced by all things foreign) to enact policies against
´
workers and the poor. It is a variation of the theme of Peron’s ‘‘arrival’’ as an
external player (as emphasized by Sigal and Veron but with special signiﬁcance for
the beliefs about the generation of income). One example is:
It can be seen that, not versed in the art of pretending, I have exposed the
distressing situations that burdened my feelings as I absorbed the Daedalus of
laws and decrees (…) which in a large number of cases restricted the rights of
workers, or, if they recognized them, it would be to kill the last trace of the
hope of justice. May 1st, 1945.
I have been accused of having agitated the conscience of the country’s
workers. Of having created a social problem where none existed before …
instead of silencing the inequalities and social injustices, I have uncovered
them so that we all could know where evil was and we could ﬁnd the more
convenient medicines…. The previous tactic consisted in faking a social
welfare … with the exclusive aim of not disturbing the good digestion of the
golden Bourgeoisie. May 1st, 1945.
Another characteristic of his speeches is the continuous attempt to reassure
supporters that he has a coherent view of the world. Examples take place in several
´
speeches, but the one on May 24th, 1950 is centered on explaining Peron’s theories.
He begins by reacting to accusations that his is not a coherent economic plan, stating
that
It has been said that … the Justicialista movement lacks an economic theory.
Nothing more untrue. We have a perfect economic theory. What happens is
that we have not yet spelled it out because we did not want that the oligarchs,
or the capitalist consortia that exploited the country through conscienceless
and avaricious bosses, could, knowing our plan, stop our action … When we
have been able to dominate these international monopolies or the forces of the

And he explains (in the same speech) some details
… old economic theory … was based on a principle called ‘‘hedonic’’. … what
does it represent? The capitalist says ‘‘my capital is the basis of the economy
because I am the one who promotes, pays and makes. As a consequence I
produce 10, and don’t produce less or more as in both cases I lose.’’ But me,
the sociologist, I tell him: ‘‘Yes sir, you produce 10, but here this man has to
eat and he tells me that 10 is not enough, he needs 20’’. Then the capitalist
replies to me ‘‘Ah, let him explode, let him eat with 10 because if I produce
more of that I lose money.’’… That is when the hedonic principle stops being
so naturally rational, least of all from the point of view of welfare, which is the
basis of all organized communities. … we do not want an economy
subordinated to capital, we want capital subordinated to the economy … If,
after that, the capitalist is able to ﬁll its coffer with gold, let him do it; we don’t
care; even better if he does. But we can’t do that until the people is satisﬁed
and happy and has the purchasing power needed to achieve a minimum of
happiness, without which life is not worth living. May 24th, 1950.
´
We now turn to three aspects of Peron’s speeches that lay the foundations for our
model in Sect. 5: a description of the types of businesspeople, elaborations on the
idea that ‘‘others’’ determine our income, and ﬁnally some ideas on what constitutes
appropriate Government policy.
3.2 Types of Businesspeople
The ‘‘conspiracy’’ that Peron comes to uncover is relevant to workers because it
identiﬁes an inﬂuence on their income. This representation requires that capitalists,
´
at least until Peron’s ‘‘arrival’’, were unkind (inconsiderate or who made their
money through corrupt means). The speeches include constant references to such
‘‘bad types’’ amongst business people.
People have been faced with the idea that a fateful lodge of demagogues was
the ruling class of the country, its elite, and as such was made up by wise, rich
and kind people. It has to be pointed out that the wise have rarely been rich
and the rich have rarely been kind. October 15th, 1944.
In other words, those privileged by the capitalist regime are ﬁnished; those
that had everything, that took the cow in the ship when they went to Europe to
have coffee with milk. No, let’s have them have coffee with milk, but with
powder milk. It is not that bad for them. May 12th, 1950.
It used to be easy for capitalists: when there was a strike workers were put in
jail, they were processed and they did not rise again. … Remember Vasena. …
Workers confronted the situation but the result was several thousand men
dead. The oligarchs were all home doing the ‘‘ﬁve o’clock tea’’. … It used to
happen that a capitalist who was almost bankrupt was made to earn, with just a
signature, two or three million pesos without him having the need to do more

this way favors were being granted upon someone who perhaps was a
shameless one. August 9th, 1950.

3.3 ‘‘Others’’ determine our income
´
With ‘‘bad types’’ amongst the capitalists, it was easier for Peron to press forward
with the idea that the process where income was generated was under their
inﬂuence. This matches well with the widespread belief that Argentina is a rich
country and one has to ﬁnd an explanation for why there is want amidst plenty (for a
discussion of belief formation when natural resources are important, see Di Tella
et al. 2010). Indeed, one part of his speeches can be reduced to arguments in support
of the idea that instead of individual effort (internal to the individual) or luck
(external but without intention), the relevant inﬂuence on income is an external
force with human intention. It is ‘‘others’’ who are actively taking actions that lower
the income of Argentinians. It is not a question of making a bigger effort at the
individual level; nor a question of taking a collective stand to reduce the inﬂuence of
natural elements (perhaps through insurance or a better selection of activities and
crops). It is a question of actively opposing other actors that try to ‘‘exploit’’
Argentines (on the role of corruption perceptions in explaining the appeal of
capitalism, see Di Tella and MacCulloch 2009).
There are numerous examples of this conception of the income generating
´
process, and the support of the State in enforcing it, in Peron’s speeches. One
example is
The economic destiny of workers was exclusively in the hands of the bosses
… and if workers organized a protest movement or adopted an attitude in
defense of their rights, they were left out of the law and exposed to the bosses’
response and the police repression. … A group of capitalists, characterized the
most by its continued, bloody opposition to workers’ vindications, has plotted
an unthinkable maneuver to neutralize the steps that had been adopted to stop
the rise in the cost of living … and counteract the effects of inﬂation. May 1st,
1945.
… we need arms, brains, capital. But capital that is humanized in its function,
which puts the public’s welfare before a greedy interest in individual proﬁt. I
express my strongest rejection to the God of unproductive and static gold, to
the cold and calculating super capitalism that harbors in its metallic gutters
Shylock’s infamous sentiments. May 1st, 1947.
In the year 1943 our economy was in the hands of foreign capitalist consortia
because, until 1943, those consortia were those that paid a vile price to
producers, gathered, exported, transported and sold to foreign consumers the
produce of Argentine work. It cannot be doubted that most of the proﬁts went
to such intermediation. March 5th, 1950.
There might remain some former exploiter of human labor, who cannot

companies who might yearn for the times of the Bembergs, when treason was
also proﬁtable… May 1st, 1950.
300 families in our country, for example, put together their capital and
enslaved 17 million Argentines. August 9th, 1950.
We are in favor that a man might enrich himself working, but we oppose that
he might do so defrauding or taking advantage of other people’s weaknesses.
We want (…) that each Argentine has prosperity and good fortune within
reach, but we do not accept that to obtain them he would commit crimes
against other Argentines or against the community that we all are a part of.
March 5th, 1952.
On some occasions, as in the reference to industrialist Otto Bemberg above,
´
Peron names speciﬁc members of the elite. In one case members of the elite are
described as themselves guilty of exploiting other capitalists. The example is
The monopoly, be it called … Bunge y Born, Dreyfus, etc. … was the one
doing the gathering … the poor producer received six pesos and this
intermediary octopus received thirty or forty for what somebody else had
produced … When this is organized properly, the small farmer will produce,
transport, gather, sell; and the product will go exclusively to him and not for
the ‘‘smart one’’, who constitutes a tumor that was placed in the middle.
August 9th, 1950.
Yet in some of these same speeches he distinguishes between local and foreign
capitalists and justiﬁes the behavior of the former. This is often mentioned in the
context of speeches with a strong nationalist component.
When I have said that there was excessive exploitation, I have not blamed our
bosses, because I know full well that our bosses were themselves exploited
from the other side (…) That is why we have bought the railroads and
everything else concerning public services (…) May 12th, 1950.
3.4 Appropriate government policy
These descriptions of the state of affairs in Argentina at the time naturally lead to
the justiﬁcation of a set of interventionist policies adopted to address these
problems. Interestingly, in these portions of his speeches, the announced policies are
not only linked to the solution of the set of economic problems uncovered, but
Argentine identity (i.e., the ‘‘type’’ of person who would implement these policies)
are. There is a connection to identity in that there are (apparently discreet)
categories of people that take certain actions, so that when these actions change,
identity also changes, which appears inherently desirable (for a model of identity
see Akerlof and Kranton 2005). It is as if people who are able to defy their
exploiters and stand up for their rights (and cannot be fooled into accepting

The speeches provide several examples of the interventionist policies that match
´
the needs created by Peron’s description of the main problems faced by Argentina.
These include,
We implement, in a loyal and sincere fashion, a social policy designed to give
workers a human place in society, we treat him as a brother and as an
Argentine. October 15th, 1944.
No man should earn less than what he needs to live. … We said that there is a
line for life determined by the minimum essential wage, and those below that
line were the submerged; and that in our country there could not be
‘‘submerged’’; everyone had to be ‘‘emerged’’. October 21st, 1946.
If we have intervened in some (enterprises) it has been because we had to
somehow (avoid) the constant outﬂow of national wealth. (…) not only we
respect private activity, but we also help and protect it. The only thing we
don’t want is a return to the old age of monopolistic consortia of exploitation.
We want that men work (…) as they see ﬁt but we do not want that it takes
place at the expense of the consumer or the producer. We want that he who
produces wealth may place it without pressure or exploitation of any type.
February 7th, 1950.
´
The Estatuto del Peon, might not be to the liking of some exploiters-withoutconscience, (…) who have been upset at the possibility that I might defend
with more enthusiasm the perfecting of the human race than that of Argentine
bulls or dogs. March 5th, 1950.
One of the barriers to national unity was undoubtedly the injustices committed
by the capitalist oligarchy exploiting workers with the complicity of the
authorities … in charge of distributive justice…. A people with an immense
majority of slaves cannot be free, just as a free people can never be subjugated.
… I am not exaggerating when I say that in 1943 there were slaves in the
Argentine Republic. May 1st, 1950.
Today, May 1st, the La Prensa newspaper … will be handed over to the
workers … This newspaper, which exploited its workers and the poor during
years, which was a reﬁned instrument of all foreign and national exploitation,
which represented the crudest form of treason to the motherland, will have to
purge its sins serving the working people. May 1st, 1951.
The government is committed to enforcing price controls, even if that means
hanging them all. … They have a right to earn, but they don’t have a right to
steal. May 1st, 1952.
´
This simpliﬁed overview of Peron’s speeches suggests to us that an important
component of Peronist beliefs is that others determine our welfare. This suggests
two changes to the standard formulation in economics, where agents are assumed to
derive income from individual effort or from luck (which is beyond anyone’s
control). The ﬁrst is that other players can affect an individual’s income (local elites,

dimension, which we interpret as an inﬂuence of fairness in people’s welfare (and
not just income). Given these beliefs, there is a role for government in ensuring that
workers are treated with dignity (‘‘humanize capital’’), which we interpret as some
reassurance that ﬁrms are behaving with some reasonable amount of concern for
workers’ well-being.

4 Peronism and the American democrats: differences in survey data
on beliefs and values
´
Given Peron’s continued inﬂuence on political and economic events even after the
1955 coup, it is of interest to provide at least some evidence on the later evolution of
Peronist beliefs and values, and to place them in comparative perspective (for
example, by comparing them to American beliefs as a benchmark). The approach
we follow is to focus on a snapshot of the public’s interpretation of Peronism at a
later date. Unfortunately, continued survey data from different periods are
unavailable. However, we have data on beliefs and voting pertaining to the 1990s
from a comparative survey that contains data for the US and Argentina (and other
countries). Of course, the 1990s was a period where both the US and Argentina are
ruled by two politicians, Menem and Clinton, that are elected on a platform that is
on the left of the political spectrum but who end up implementing reforms that are
more consistent with centrist/conservative values. Of course, there are some
differences: in the case of the US this happens only after there are mid-term
electoral losses and mainly involve welfare reforms and the dropping of some of the
less popular initiatives such as healthcare reform, whereas in the case of Menem the
departures were larger and made from the start of the term. They also involved a
complex relationship with the labor movement, which was an important early
supporter of Menem (see Murillo 2001, Levitsky 2003 and Etchemendy and
Palermo 1998, for discussions; on policy reversals in Latin America during this
period, see Stokes 2001).
Our interest in comparisons with the US comes from a hypothesis ‘‘explaining’’
Peronism as the Argentine version of the American democrats (given that they are
supported by similar demographic and socio-economic groups). A similar point is
often made with respect to Peronism and the British Labour Party. Cross-country
survey data on people’s opinion about elements of capitalism is available from the
World Values Survey. Coordinated by Ronald Inglehart, the 1995–97 wave asks
adults (older than 18) in over 50 countries several questions of interest. In the US,
the data are obtained from a representative sample of individuals age 18 and older
through face to face interviews. In Argentina, sampling was limited to the urbanized
central portion of the country, where about 70% of the population is concentrated.13
Importantly for our purposes, the survey contains data on (self-reported) voting,
allowing us to derive measures of vote intention, or at least political sympathy,
13
Within this region, 200 sampling points were selected, with approximately ﬁve individuals being
interviewed in each sampling point through multi-stage probability sampling. Regions include the
´
´

Table 1 The Education and Income of Peronists and democrats Source: Own elaboration based on
World Value Survey, Wave 3
Peronists

NonPeronists

Democrats

Republicans

Percentage of group answering family income is in
lowest 5 of 10 categories

69

59

42

29

Percentage of group answering education is in lowest
6 of 9 categories

88

69

56

47

Peronist (Non-Peronist) is the sub-sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the Peronist
Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) are the sub-sample of Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. Family Income is the
respondent’s answer to a question about total family income. Education is the respondent’s educational
achievement

towards the main parties in the country, including Peronists. Thus, we ﬁrst divide
the sample in Argentina into two groups: between those that declare to vote for
Peronists and those that declare to want to vote for other groups. The precise
question asked is: ‘‘If there were a national election tomorrow, for which party on
this list would you vote? Just call out the number on this card.’’ Then a card with ‘‘1.
Partido Justicialista, 2. Union Civica Radical, 3. Frepaso, 4. Modin and 7. Blank
ballot’’ is shown. Peronists are those answering 1, while non-Peronists are those
answering 2, 3 and 4. In the US, a similar procedure allows us to determine two
subsamples: Republicans and democrats.
We then used a measure of income to divide the sample into two categories (rich
and poor). The question asked was ‘‘Here is a scale of incomes. We would like to
know in what group your household is, counting all wages, salaries, pensions and
other incomes that come in. Just give the letter of the group your household falls
into, before taxes and other deductions.’’ Then, a scale with 10 groups,
corresponding to the income deciles in the country, is shown (this scale is different
in each country). We classify as poor those in the lowest ﬁve categories. Table 1
shows that 69% of Peronists, whereas 59% on non-Peronists, report incomes that are
ˆ
in the lowest ﬁve categories (see Benoıt and Dubra 2011, who show that it is not
necessarily irrational for a majority of people to rank themselves in the bottom half
of a distribution). In the US, within those admitting a preference for voting a
particular group, we note that within those that prefer the democrats, 42% declare to
be in the lowest 5 deciles, while only 29% of Republicans ﬁnd themselves there.
This broadly corresponds to the idea that Peronists and democrats share a similar
base of support (at least in the limited sense that they have more support amongst
the poor than the opposition). Table 1 also shows results using educational
attainment and reaches a similar conclusion.14 These results echo the conclusion of
14
The question asks ‘‘What is the highest educational level that you have attained?’’ and it provides as
possible answers the (functional equivalent for each society) of ‘‘1. No formal education, 2. Incomplete
primary school, 3. Complete primary school, 4. Incomplete secondary school: technical/vocational type,
5. Complete secondary school: technical/vocational type, 6. Incomplete secondary: university-preparatory
type, 7. Complete secondary: university-preparatory type, 8. Some university-level education, without

Table 2 The beliefs of Peronists and democrats: Luck vs. Effort Source: Own elaboration based on
World Value Survey, Wave 3
Peronists

Non-Peronists

Democrats

Republicans

Laziness

39

20

49

75

Unfair society

61

80

51

25

Ratio

0.64

0.25

0.96

3

Run by a few big interests

71

95

76

68

Run for all

29

5

24

32

Ratio

2.4

19

3.2

2.1

Luck vs. Effort

Beliefs about who runs economy

(1) Peronist (Non-Peronist) is the sub-sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the
Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) are the sub-sample of
Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. (2) ‘‘Laziness’’ is the
fraction of these groups answering ‘‘They are poor because of laziness and lack of willpower’’ to the
question ‘‘Why in your opinion are there people in this country who live in need?’’, whereas ‘‘Unfair
Society’’ is the group answering ‘‘They are poor because society treats them unfairly’’. (3) ‘‘Run by a few
big interests’’ is the group giving that answer to the question ‘‘Generally speaking, would you say that this
country is run by a few big interests looking out for themselves, or that it is run for the beneﬁt of all the
people?’’

a Peronist politician who declared upon looking at an electoral map, ‘‘progress
compromises us, education kills us’’. In auxiliary tests (not reported) we tried selfreported social class and reached similar results: Peronists and democrats seem to
represent similar groups in their societies (the poor and those with low educational
attainment).15
Given our interest in the role of beliefs, it is relevant to see if these similarities
extend to beliefs about the role of luck and other economic issues. Given that we do
not take a position of the relative importance of each belief in determining Peronist
ideology, we do not construct formal tests and so our results are only illustrative.
The classic belief concerns the role of luck (versus effort) in the generation of
income. The question usually used to capture this belief is ‘‘Why, in your opinion,
are there people in this country who live in need? Here are two opinions: Which
comes closest to your view? 1. They are poor because of laziness and lack of will
power, 2. They are poor because society treats them unfairly’’. The results are
summarized in Table 2.
The main pattern is that the whole electorate in Argentina seems to be on the left
of the political spectrum, as most people seem to believe that poverty is the result of
luck (or that society treats them unfairly) rather than laziness. However, in relative
terms the Peronists seem to exhibit a pattern closer to the one of the Republicans
instead of the democrats. Indeed, the biggest proportion of believers in laziness as a
source of poverty takes place amongst Peronists and the Republicans. The ratio of
believers in Laziness (39%) to believers in an unfair society (61%) in the Peronist
15
The question used reads ‘‘People sometimes describe themselves as belonging to the working class, the
middle class, or the upper or lower class. Would you describe yourself as belonging to the: 1. Upper class,

Table 3 Beliefs in Argentina and the US: Peronists look like Republicans Source: Own elaboration
based on World Value Survey, Wave 3
Argentina
Ratio
(Peronist/Non-Peronist)
Poor are lazy

United States
Ratio
(Republican/Democrat)

Workers should follow instructions

2.6 = 0.64/0.25

3.1 = 3/0.96

0.64 = 39/61; 0.25 = 20/80

3 = 75/25;0.96 = 49/51

1.6

2.4

=0.81/0.51; 45/55;34/66

=3.35/1.4, 77/23;58/42

Run by few big interests

0.1

0.7

=2.4/19; 71/29;95/5

=2.1/3.2, 68/32;76/24

Jobs for men instead of women

2.1

1.3

=0.59/0.28, 34/58;20/71

=0.37/0.3, 23/63;21/71

More respect for authority

4.4

2.2

=15/3.4, 75/5;54/16

=28/12, 84/3;75/6

More importance of money

0.5

0.8

=3.3/6.5; 66/20;72/11

=9.6/11, 67/7;70/6

Acceptable to cheat

1.9

1.2

=4.9/2.6, 83/17;72/28

=6.1/4.9, 86/14;83/17

Competition good

1.2

2.1

=1.2/1, 55/45;50/50

=2.7/1.3, 73/27;57/43

(1) Peronist (Non-Peronist) is the sub-sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the
Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) are the sub-sample of
Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. (2) Deﬁnitions of beliefs
in Appendix 2

sub-sample is 0.64, whereas amongst non-Peronists it is 20–80%, for a ratio of 0.25.
On the other hand, the percentage of believers in laziness (unfair society) amongst
the democrats is 49% (51% respectively), whereas amongst the Republicans is much
higher 75–25%. Focusing on the ratios of laziness to unfairness, the democrats have
a ratio of 0.96, whereas that for the Republicans is 3.
As another illustration, Table 2 considers the question ‘‘Generally speaking,
would you say that this country is run by a few big interests looking out for
themselves, or that it is run for the beneﬁt of all the people?’’ with answers ‘‘1. Run
by a few big interests, and 2. Run for all the people’’. Again, we ﬁnd that the two
groups in Argentina (Peronists and non-Peronists) tend to give the answer that is
presumably on the left of the political spectrum (Run by a few big interests), but the
relative position of Peronists in Argentina is more like the relative position of
Republicans than of democrats.
Table 3 considers several beliefs that are relevant to understanding Peronists
beliefs and values. One theme emerging from this table when looking at the absolute
level of their answers, is that Argentines tend to be more on the ‘‘left’’ of the
political spectrum (consistent with Di Tella and MacCulloch 2009). More
interesting, they all point out in a similar direction in relative terms: the Peronists

democrats). In all cases the ratio in Argentina and in the US are on the same side of
1. Take for example, the idea that workers should follow instructions at work. We
split answers into two groups, those answering ‘‘they should’’ on the one hand, and
those that answer either ‘‘it depends’’ or ‘‘they should be convinced ﬁrst’’ on the
other hand. The majority of republican voters (77 versus 23% of them, or in a
proportion 3.35–1), perhaps not surprisingly, tend to answer that workers should
follow instructions. Democrats have a similar position, but less intense (the
proportion 58/42 is just under 1.4–1). So, in relative terms, Republicans are
somewhat more likely to agree with this statement.
In Argentina most people disagree with this statement, as reﬂected by both
Peronists and non-Peronists having ratios that are lower than one, consistent with
respondents being on the left. However, the ratio for Peronists (0.81 = 45/55) is
somewhat higher than that for non-Peronists (0.51 = 34/66), suggesting that in
relative terms, Peronists are more likely to agree with the idea that workers should
follow orders than non-Peronists, which is surprising given Peronist’s afﬁnity with
´
labor causes, at least as detected in Peron’s speeches.
The rest of Table 3 investigates a number of other beliefs and values appearing in
´
Peron’s speeches. For example, he discusses competition on his speech of March 5,
1952: ‘‘Progress and individual prosperity cannot be based rationally in the harming
of others because that unleashes an egoist and merciless struggle, which cancels all
cooperation, destroys solidarity and ends in dissociation’’. The beliefs covered in the
Table include those related to the role of luck versus effort in the determination of
income, and the role of others in affecting individual fates (already discussed), as
well as those related to feminism (jobs for men), authoritarian views (respect for
authority), materialism (less emphasis on money), honesty (acceptable to cheat),
competition (competition is harmful) and economic organization (ownership of
business). In all cases, the answers given by Peronist voters (relative to those given
by the opposition) are similar to the answers given by Republicans (relative to the
democrats).
In brief, the evidence from the 1990s suggests that the opposition to Peronism is
on the ideological left, even though they are on higher income and educational
achievement than the Peronists. If it is true that the opposition to Peron came from
the conservatives, then it is plausible to conclude that Peronism has experienced less
ideological change than the rest of the country.

5 A model of labor market exploitation based on altruistic preferences
The previous sections highlight the role of several elements that are non-standard in
economic models. Two that are of particular interest to us are the idea that there is
something more to market transactions in the labor market than just the exchange of
work for money. There is also the possibility of exploitation, connected to ﬁrm
owners who do not care about the welfare of their workers. The speech of August 9,
´
1950 is typical. Note that the part where Peron states ‘‘Workers confronted the
situation but the result was several thousand men dead. The oligarchs were all home

stress the contrast between the fate of workers whose life is in danger with that of
employers who are oblivious to their predicament and more preoccupied with
engaging in a social practice that is the norm in England. Accordingly, the model we
develop is one where there is the possibility of worker exploitation by ‘‘unkind’’
´
elites, and Peron’s punishment of these elites provides increases in worker total
utility through an emotional (non-material) channel.
The model in this section is an adaptation of the model in Di Tella and Dubra
(2013) to labor markets. It stresses the idea that a policy that may not be optimal
under ‘‘standard’’ models (that ignore emotions), may become optimal if workers
experience anger when they are exploited, and the government knows it. To make
our point, we introduce emotions in the form of worker anger at perceptions of
insufﬁcient ﬁrm altruism (as in Levine, 1998 and Rotemberg, 2008) in the textbook
version of Salop (1979).
There are n workers, each characterized by a parameter x interpreted as either a
1.

‘‘preferred variety, preferred workplace’’; this can represent
(a)
(b)

2.

A taste for working in one industry over another.
A cost of re-converting the workers’ human capital to another industry.

‘‘location parameter; how far away do I live from my workplace’’.

For each worker, his location is drawn from a uniform distribution on the circle
of circumference 1. There are m evenly distributed ﬁrms along the circle (there are
m ﬁrms, but we use b = 1/m as the relevant parameter measuring concentration);
ﬁrms are of one of two types, altruistic or selﬁsh. Workers can supply either one unit
of labor, or 0; this binary choice is a simpliﬁcation, which is in line with the
indivisibilities postulated in Hansen (1985). Individuals’ gross utility of not working
is s; when they work, if they have to travel a distance x (or they are x away from
their preferred job) and they receive a pay of w, their net surplus is w-tx-s (i.e.,
they have a transport cost of t per unit of distance traveled).
In addition to these material costs, the worker may become angry with the ﬁrm
for which he works. There are several reasons why incorporating emotions in this
setup makes sense. First, simple introspection tells us that we don’t always do what
is best from a narrowly deﬁned ‘‘economic’’ perspective. Second, a large body of
literature has shown in the laboratory that individuals don’t always maximize the
amount of money they receive (even when the choices don’t involve effort), and that
emotions play a signiﬁcant role. This reaction has been modeled as a preference for
fair outcomes, as in Levine (1998) and Rotemberg (2008), who show how the
introduction of a reciprocal altruism term in the utility function can explain quite
well the seemingly paradoxical evidence from ultimatum games (see also Fehr and
Schmidt 1999 inter alia). Finally, a third motivation to include emotions in our
´
model of the labor market is that Peron’s speeches contain several direct references

What is the social economy? It is a change in the old system of exploitation,
not like the communists want, but in a gentler form. The capitalist regime is an
abuse of property. The communist solution is the suppression of property. We
believe the solution is not the suppression of property but rather the
suppression of the abuse of property. … We are not involved in a social
ordering that will take the country into a ﬁght, but rather to calmness. June
24th, 1948.
If a worker is angry, we must subtract from his utility a term k(p ? p-w), where
p is the productivity of the worker in the ﬁrm, and p is the proﬁt the ﬁrm obtains
from the other workers. This term is just a ‘‘spite’’ term: when angry, the worker
dislikes the ﬁrms making a proﬁt, and he is angrier when he contributes to those
proﬁts. What triggers anger is that the individual rejects the hypothesis that the ﬁrm
is altruistic.
In this market, ﬁrms choose wage levels (i.e., it is not a competitive market)
w and get in exchange a product of p per worker, so when total employment is E its
proﬁts are (p-w)E. If the ﬁrm is not altruistic, that is all there is in the ﬁrms&utility
(utility = proﬁts). If the ﬁrm is altruistic, its utility is proﬁts plus a term that
depends on the utility of the worker. The altruistic ﬁrm has a cost of a if worker
utility is lower than a certain level (this level is exogenous for this model, but can
come from learning, adaptation, history, etc.) We call the threshold s; we will set it
to be the utility the worker would obtain in a ‘‘fairly competitive’’ labor market (see
below).
In what follows, and without loss of generality, we normalize t = 1 and all other
parameters are just ‘‘normalized by t’’. This normalization is completely general.
We also assume (without loss of generality) that the number of workers is n = 1.

6 Equilibrium
We will analyze a signaling game, in which ﬁrms, when choosing a wage level,
signal their type. An equilibrium in this setting is a triplet [e(w,x;l),w(h);l(w)]
where:
•

•
•
•

e(Á) is an ‘‘employment’’ decision strategy (the same for all workers; we are
looking at symmetric equilibria) as a function of wage w, tastes x (or distance)
and beliefs l (of whether the ﬁrm is altruistic or not) into {0,1}, where a = 1
means ‘‘work’’ and a = 0 means ‘‘don& work’’;
t
w(Á) is a function that maps types into wages (one wage for each type; the same
function for all ﬁrms);
l(Á) is a function that maps wages into [0,1], such that l(w) is a number that
represents the probability that the worker assigns to the ﬁrm being altruistic.
e is optimal given x, w and l; w is optimal given e (and other ﬁrms playing w); l
is consistent (it is derived from Bayes&rule whenever possible).

We will focus on equilibria, where beliefs are of the sort ‘‘I reject the ﬁrm is

We are ruling out (for example) equilibria in which the worker rejects that the ﬁrm
is altruistic if the ﬁrm pays a wage w [ w* (i.e., the worker comes to believe the
ﬁrm is selﬁsh even if it is paying a wage above the ‘‘target’’ wage; which would be
of course unnatural); in standard signaling models, beliefs like these may still be
part of an equilibrium, because in equilibrium one does not observe wages w [ w*,
and so the consistency condition (that beliefs be derived from Bayes rule) places no
constraint on beliefs.

7 Oligopoly
In this section, we characterize the pooling equilibria in an oligopoly. Of course,
there may be separating equilibria too. But we focus the analysis of pooling
equilibria for four reasons.
1.

2.

3.

4.

The ﬁrst is ‘‘analytic’’: we want to know whether the set of parameters for
which there exists a pooling equilibrium shrinks as the number of ﬁrms
decreases; since there is no anger in pooling equilibria, this would establish that
the ‘‘chances’’ of anger appearing are larger when there is less competition.
´
The second reason for focusing on pooling equilibria is ‘‘historic’’: in Peron’s
speeches there is a reference to the possibility that capitalism works well in
some circumstances (for example, there is a reference to this ‘‘calmness’’ in the
speech of May 1st, 1945). This ‘‘benchmark’’ case, from which the local elites
have departed, is represented as a pooling equilibrium.
The third is to avoid making choices that would need to be made, and that,
however, we resolved them, would leave some readers unsatisﬁed. Take for
example, the following. In a separating equilibrium, workers are angry at some
ﬁrms; when they are, the optimal wage by the ﬁrms is higher (than if they are
not); this leads to a larger material utility for workers. This leaves us with the
conundrum that selﬁsh ﬁrms are giving to their employees a higher material
utility, and yet they are angry. This begs the question: are workers (in reality,
not in the model) angry because the ﬁrm is selﬁsh, or because the ﬁrm acts in
ways that harms its employees? Put differently, would you be angry at
somebody you know is nasty, but is temporarily pretending to be nice (not
because he is trying to change, but just to avoid some punishment)?
Psychological research has not answered this question in a satisfactory manner
yet.
The ﬁnal reason is tractability: in a separating equilibrium, when there are many
ﬁrms, the patterns of combinations of ﬁrms becomes complicated (a selﬁsh ﬁrm
surrounded by two selﬁsh ﬁrms, or by one selﬁsh and one altruistic, or by two
altruistic, etc.; similarly for an altruistic ﬁrm and its neighbors). In ex-ante
terms, though, each ﬁrm does not know whether its neighbors will be of one

8 Pooling equilibria
Our ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd the necessary conditions under which a wage wo is part of a
pooling equilibrium, in which workers attain their target level of utility. Consider a
ﬁrm which maximizes proﬁts in a deviation from a pooling equilibrium with wage
wo (we are not including a utility cost of the deviating ﬁrm, since we assume for the
time being that the equilibrium is such that workers attain their target utility level s).
If the ﬁrm increases its wage, workers won& be angry. In that case, labor supply is
t
given by the sum of all (unit) supplies of workers who are closer to the deviating
ﬁrm than the two types of workers (one to each side) who are indifferent between
working for the ﬁrm we are analyzing and working for its neighbor:
w À s À x ¼ wo À s À ðb À xÞ , S ¼ 2x ¼ b þ w À wo :
Proﬁts are then
ðp À wÞðb þ w À wo Þ:
When the ﬁrm maximizes this expression, we obtain an optimal wage of
w¼

p þ w À b
:
2

For the ﬁrm not to want to deviate from wo, it must be the case that this optimal
wage is lower than wo, or equivalently
w¼

p þ w À b
2

w , p À b

w :

ð1Þ

In other words, if the oligopoly wage is too low, the ﬁrms are better off
increasing their wage, and so workers will not punish them (by getting angry). If the
ﬁrm lowers its wage, consumers become angry, and labor supply is given by the
condition that
w À s À x À kðp À wÞ ¼ w À s À ðb À xÞ , S ¼ b þ ð1 þ kÞw À kp À w :
In that case, proﬁts are
ðp À wÞðb þ ð1 þ kÞw À kp À w Þ:
For the ﬁrm not to want to deviate and offer the optimal wage in this deviation,
w¼

w À b þ pð1 þ 2kÞ
ðb À w þ pÞ2
)p¼
2ð 1 þ kÞ
4ð1 þ kÞ

it must be the case that proﬁts in the equilibrium are larger than these deviation

ðb À w þ pÞ2
) w
4ð1 þ kÞ

6

h
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃi
p À b 1 þ 2k À 2 kð1 þ kÞ :

ð2Þ

Notice that when k = 0 (the standard Salop case), we obtain from (1) and (2)
wo ¼ p À b:
Equations (1) and (2) provide two constraints to the equilibrium wage wo. The
third and ﬁnal restriction is that for a given s, as we decrease the number of ﬁrms,
the wage must also increase to achieve the target utility. Worker utility (in a pooling
equilibrium with wage wo) is the number of ﬁrms, 1/b, times the total utility of
workers hired by each ﬁrm:
Z b
2 2 
b
ðw À s À xÞdx ¼ w À s À
b 0
4
This utility is larger than s if and only if
w À s À

b
b
! s , w ! s þ s þ
4
4

ð3Þ

We now present one important result: as competition decreases (enough), anger
is more likely. The following proposition shows that as competition decreases, a
pooling equilibrium is less likely. But since pooling equilibria have no anger, and
separating equilibria do (in expected terms there will be some selﬁsh ﬁrms), when
pooling equilibria disappear, anger appears.
Proposition 1 There is a critical n* such that for all n0 [ n C n*, the set of
pooling wages is smaller when there are n ﬁrms than when there are n0 . That is, as
competition decreases, anger is more likely.
Proof

Deﬁne b* so that Eqs. (3) and (1) hold with equality and are equated:
sþsþ

bÃ
4
¼ p À bÃ , bÃ ¼ ðp À s À sÞ:
5
4

Let n* = 1/b*. For b* [ b the set of equilibrium wages is increasing in
b (decreasing in n) because: Eq. (3) is not binding; the slope of (2) is smaller (in
absolute value) than the slope of (1).
h
The plot below illustrates the three constraints on wo imposed by Eqs. 1–3. The
wage wo must lie between the two loci with negative slopes (the ﬂatter one is Eq. 2
and the steeper, 1) which arise from the ﬁrms’ incentives not to deviate. The wage

condition that fewer ﬁrms imply higher wages if workers are to obtain their target
utilities).

Next, we present another relevant result, connecting the productivity of ﬁrms, the
rise in anger and the possible subsequent regulation. This result provides a potential
explanation for why people in less developed countries do not like capitalism. If
productivity is lower and more volatile in LDCs, that would explain why capitalists
and capitalism are not popular.
Proposition 2 When productivity decreases, or when it becomes more volatile,
anger is more likely.
Proof When productivity decreases, the two loci of Eqs. (2) and (1) move
downwards by the amount of the decrease in productivity. Since Eq. (3) is
unchanged, the set of pooling equilibrium wages shrinks.
A larger volatility in productivities makes it more likely that a low (pooling
breaking) cost will happen, and then the selﬁsh ﬁrms will reveal themselves as such,
and anger will arise.
h
An interesting point to note is that higher variability in productivity in LDCs
could be the consequence of higher regulations to begin with: ﬁrms in sectors with a
comparative advantage could have higher worker productivities, while ﬁrms in
protected sectors lower productivities (even considering government regulations to
protect them). In a sense, then, Peronism, by introducing distortions, generates anger
towards capitalists and perpetuates the beliefs that Peronism fostered.
The next result illustrates another obvious feature of the rise in anger: when for
some exogenous reason workers become ‘‘captive’’ of one particular ﬁrm, anger is
more likely. The mechanism is as one would expect: when worker& labor elasticity
s

temptation may be large enough that an anger-triggering wage decrease may be
proﬁtable. In countries with concentrated industries, like Argentina, and with little
inter-industry mobility, workers do not have mobility, and so elasticity of supply is
lower.
We model this increase in captivity by changing the cost of re-converting to
another industry, while keeping rival& wages ﬁxed. The reason for this assumption is
s
simple: if it is suddenly harder for workers employed in ﬁrm i to work in ﬁrm i - 1
or i ? 1, those ﬁrms will keep their wages ﬁxed: if they did not wish to attract the
marginal worker before the change in re-conversion costs, they don& want to after,
t
so there is no incentive to raise wages; if ﬁrm i-1 did not want to lower its wage
before the change in costs, they don& want to do so after, since the incentives of the
t
marginal worker working for them have not changed. As will become transparent in
the proof, an equivalent way of modeling this is assuming that the two neighbors of
the ﬁrm being analyzed move farther away, as if there had been a decrease in the
number of ﬁrms.
Proposition 3 Assume that, for a given parameter conﬁguration, there is a
pooling equilibrium with a wage of wo. If the cost of re-converting to ﬁrms i - 1 or
i ? 1 increases from 1 to t [ 1, but the cost to ﬁrm i remains constant, the ﬁrm’s
incentives to decrease its wage increase. There is a threshold t* such that if t C t*,
ﬁrm i lowers its wage and workers become angry.
Proof When the cost of converting to ﬁrms i - 1 and i ? 1 increases to t, the
supply faced by ﬁrm i (after an anger-triggering decrease in wage) and its proﬁts,
are
S¼2

w À w þ ðw À pÞk þ bt
w À w þ ðw À pÞk þ bt
) p ¼ ðp À wÞ2
tþ1
tþ1

and the optimal wage and proﬁt are
w¼

p À w þ 2pk À bt
ðp À w þ btÞ2
)p¼
:
2ð k þ 1Þ
2ðk þ 1Þðt þ 1Þ

Notice that in the equation for the optimal wage, an increase in t is equivalent to
an increase in b: a fall in the number of ﬁrms. For large enough t, these proﬁts
exceed the oligopoly proﬁt, and the ﬁrm lowers its wage, causing anger. QED
In the above proposition we have assumed that workers continue to make
inferences based on the equilibrium prior to the shock. Although one could argue
that a new equilibrium (one with fewer ﬁrms or with higher t) should be the
benchmark, we believe that keeping the old equilibrium beliefs is also plausible. In
addition, the case of fewer ﬁrms also leads to more anger, as established by
Proposition 1.
The previous proposition may be particularly relevant for the rise of Peronism
and Peronist beliefs. In a time of rising speed of technological change, the cost of re´

a consequence of the increasing exploitation by ﬁrms that had gained more power
over their workers.
Any wage wo in the range determined by Eqs. (1) and (2) can be part of a pooling
equilibrium if we choose s or a appropriately. Note that if the ﬁrm is altruistic and it
lowers its wage enough, there could be a utility cost of providing workers with a
very low level of utility. Since we found necessary conditions, we focused only on
the incentives of the selﬁsh ﬁrm. When we want to build an equilibrium with a wage
wo within the range we have just identiﬁed, we need to take into account this utility
cost for the altruistic ﬁrm. But choosing s or a low enough, any one of these wages
is part of an equilibrium. We do not elaborate, because the construction is simple.

9 A brief discussion of policies in this model
The model above describes a pooling equilibrium in an oligopoly without anger.
Although consumers are not angry, anger can arise if for whatever reason the
pooling equilibrium is broken. In particular, the scenario we have in mind is that the
arrival of Peron coincided with the rise in anger that led to a separating equilibrium,
and the rise in anger.16
In this model there are three channels through which regulation (setting minimum
wages and making a transfer to the ﬁrm) affects welfare. First, there is the standard
channel: a minimum wage larger than market wages, but still below productivity
increases total welfare by attracting workers to the ﬁrm (to produce something worth
p at a cost in terms of lost leisure and transportation cost of less than p). A second, quite
direct and simple channel is through the reduction in anger: since an increase in wages
lowers ﬁrms’ proﬁts, and total anger depends on the size of proﬁts, a rise in wages
reduces anger and increases welfare. Finally, any channel that reduces anger (whether
it increases wages or not) induces workers to start working, and that further increases
welfare. The second channel does not depend on individuals changing behavior; this
third channel arises because workers re-optimize. Imagine for example, a policy that
keeps wages at their pre-policy levels, but ‘‘expropriates’’ the proﬁts from the ﬁrm
(through a ﬁne, for example). In that case, in the standard model, welfare would be
unchanged. In the current model, welfare increases for two reasons: ﬁrst, each worker
who was employed is happier, but some who were not working will now enter the
workforce and become available at the ﬁned ﬁrm.
Intuition and some simple calculations show that in this model the appeal of ﬁnes
to the ﬁrms and other ‘‘populist’’ policies increases relative to their appeal in a
setting where anger plays no role (that is k = 0). To illustrate, imagine that a policy
with wage w and transfer T [ 0 to the ﬁrm is slightly better in terms of total welfare
(in a standard model with no anger) to the policy (w, T = 0). In the model with
anger, when consumers are angry, the second policy that ‘‘beats on the ﬁrm’’ is
preferred, since it reduces the amount of anger. This is an example of a policy that
16

We refer the interested reader to Di Tella and Dubra (2014) for an analysis of the separating equilibria.
Under certain parameter conditions (for example, when skills are not easily transferred in going from one
ﬁrm to another), the oligopoly results in a series of local monopsonies. The discussion of policies in this

looks bad in a standard model (a bad ‘‘populist’’ policy), but that is potentially
welfare enhancing when emotions are taken into account. Although we don’t claim
that all of the bad Argentine policies are driven by attention to emotions, we believe
that there is at least some truth to the idea that policies that are bad for long run
material growth may be optimal when workers (or consumers more generally) are
angry at certain business sectors.

10 Conclusion
´
A school of thought exempliﬁed by Dıaz Alejandro (1970, 1988) suggests that
Argentina’s relative decline is associated with the abandonment of laissez faire in
favor of interventionist policies (see also Cortes Conde 1997 and Taylor 1994).
Since voters actively demand these policies, a paradox in this explanation is that
individuals act rationally when it comes to goods markets, but irrationally when it
comes to voting. In this article we describe a set of beliefs and values that makes
´
Peron and his followers desire these policies, sometimes because of an incomplete
understanding of their consequences, and sometimes because their objective
exceeds the immediate material outcome (for example, they demand ‘‘fairness’’ in
labor relations). In the latter case, voters are rational and demand ‘‘bad policies’’
(from the narrow perspective of maximizing material payoffs).
It is worth noting that a central observation in Argentina’s relative decline is that it
was accompanied by a strong reduction in private investment: from the formidable
rates of capital accumulation pre-1913 ﬁnanced primarily by foreigners to the dismal
´
later performance. Dıaz Alejandro (1970) and Taylor (1994) have emphasized the low
savings rate and the high relative price of capital goods pre 1960. Naturally, it is
possible that the decline in investment is connected to the country’s populist tradition,
which helped spread interventionist policies and fueled political instability.
Argentina’s relative decline is visible in the 1930s and appears to accelerate in the
1970s. These two periods coincide with political instability: 1930 is the year of the ﬁrst
of several military coups and marks the beginning of the ‘‘infamous’’ decade that
´
would set the stage for the ﬁrst Peron administration; while the 1970s is marked by the
armed conﬂict involving left wing guerrillas and the military (and paramilitary) forces
´
which led to the military coup of 1976. Indeed, following Peron’s ascent to the labor
secretary in 1943, Peronism has been the preeminent political force in the country,
leading many to assume that no government could succeed without its explicit support.
´
One reason for its enduring legacy is that Peron’s more interventionist policies were in
tune with the times: after the 1930s, the increased presence of the State in the economy
was the norm, both in Argentina and in other countries.
But there are other factors that have made Peronist policies attractive to voters for
such a long period of time, even if they have contributed to its relative material
decline. In this paper we focus on three elements that help us throw light on the
nature of Peronist policies and their enduring signiﬁcance. First, we study beliefs
´
and values about the economic system present in Peron’s speeches during the period
´
1943–55. We emphasize that Peron is concerned with the income generating
´

exploitation. Indeed, whereas economists have emphasized the role of luck versus
individual effort in the determination of income and how beliefs about their relative
impact can affect the economic system (see, for example, Piketty 1995), it seems
´
that Peron is focused on the inﬂuence of actors (elites, foreigners) and how they can
willfully change the income of Argentines (as in Di Tella and MacCulloch 2009).
This provides one possible explanation why the process of policymaking might be
less a rational learning process, such as the one described in Buera et al. (2011), but
instead an attempt to reveal intentions (which by their very nature are hard to verify)
and a search for culprits. There are also a large number of references to the idea that
labor relations can have non-monetary dimensions, and the speeches connect
exploitation to this ‘‘non-material’’ dimension. This (trivially) explains why markets
that are interpreted (and regulated) in this way may perform poorly (from a material
standpoint).
Second, we study survey data for the 1990s on the beliefs of Peronist and nonPeronist voters in Argentina and Democrat and Republican voters in the US. While
Peronists have low income and education relative to the opposition (so that they
look like the US democrats), their beliefs and values suggest that Peronists are the
Argentine equivalent of the Republicans. For example, whereas all respondents in
Argentina tend to believe that the poor are unlucky rather than lazy, Peronists (just
like Republicans in the US) are somewhat more inclined than the opposition (e.g.,
non-Peronists) to believe that the poor are Lazy. In other words, while the
´
opposition to Peron during 1943–55 came from the conservatives, the opposition to
Peronism in the 1990s comes from the left of the ideological spectrum. It is worth
reiterating that in both periods, the Peronists seem to have lower income and
educational achievement than the opposition. This suggests, at the very least, that
the Peronists are changing less in terms of political ideology than the opposition.
´
Finally, given that the meaning and beliefs conveyed by Peron in his speeches are
non-standard (for economists), we present a model formalizing the possibility that
they are sub-optimal from a narrow material perspective, but that they may be
associated with improved well-being (for example, they reduce anger at aspects of
economic organization). In particular, we present a formal model of ‘‘exploitation’’
in the labor market where agents derive pleasure from treating well (badly) those
that have behaved well (badly) towards them. Firms are of two types: one is a
standard ﬁrm which might ‘‘exploit’’ the worker by paying him/her the minimum
possible wage, whereas the other type ‘‘cares’’ for the worker. Even with few
‘‘altruistic’’ ﬁrms, the equilibrium might involve no exploitation, as long as there is
sufﬁcient amount of competition. With monopsony power, the ‘‘good’’ equilibria
break down and there is scope for regulation that generates ﬁrst order welfare gains
(beyond Harberger triangles). We note that a ﬁrm might be exploiting workers even
if it is paying the same wage as other ﬁrms, as long as workers believe this ﬁrm is
doing it out of ‘‘unkindness’’ (formalized as reciprocal altruism).
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were

Appendix 1: Peron’s speeches quoted in the text
‘‘Cuidaremos el factor brazo y haremos una Argentina de hombres libres’’, 15
´
´
de octubre de 1944. Buenos Aires, 1944, Secretarıa de Trabajo y Prevision,
´
Difusion y Propaganda.
´
‘‘Las reivindicaciones logradas por los trabajadores argentinos no podran
ser destruidas’’, 1 de Mayo de 1945. Buenos Aires, 1945, sin datos de imprenta.
´
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nacion, 21 de Octubre de 1946,
´
´
Habla Peron, Subsecretarıa de Informes, Buenos Aires.
´
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nacion, al declarar inaugurado el
´
´
perıodo de sesiones, 1 de Mayo de 1947, Los Mensajes de Peron, Serie Azul y
Blanca, Mundo Peronista Ed., Buenos Aires, 1952.
´
Manifestaciones del general Peron ante los representantes patronales de la
´
´
Produccion, Industria y Comercio de la Nacion, 24 de Junio de 1948, Habla
´
´
Peron, Subsecretarıa de Informes, Buenos Aires.
´
‘‘Peron, leal amigo de los trabajadores del campo’’, 5 de Marzo de 1950,
´
´
Subsecretarıa de Informaciones de la Presidencia de la Nacion.
´
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nacion, al declarar inaugurado el
´
´
perıodo de sesiones, 1 de Mayo de 1950, Los Mensajes de Peron, Serie Azul y
Blanca, Mundo Peronista Ed., Buenos Aires, 1952.
´
‘‘Economıa y sindicalismo justicialista’’, 24 de Mayo de 1950, sin datos de
´
fecha de publicacion ni de imprenta.
´
‘‘La CGT escucha a Peron’’, 9 de Agosto de 1950, sin datos ni de fecha ni de
imprenta.
´
´
‘‘Una etapa mas en la ejecucion de la doctrina peronista en el orden
´
´
economico’’, 7 de Febrero de 1950, Subsecretarıa de informes de la presidencia de
´
la Nacion.
´
´
´
´
‘‘Peron habla sobre la organizacion economica del paıs’’, 12 de Mayo de
1950, sin datos ni de fecha ni de imprenta.
´
´
‘‘Peron y Eva hablan en el Dıa de los Trabajadores’’, 1 de Mayo de 1951,
´
´
Presidencia de la Nacion, Subsecretarıa de Informaciones.
Discurso pronunciado el 5 de marzo de 1952, sin datos de imprenta ni de fecha.
´
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nacion, al declarar inaugurado el
´
´
perıodo de sesiones, 1 de Mayo de 1952, Los Mensajes de Peron, Serie Azul y
Blanca, Mundo Peronista Ed., Buenos Aires, 1952.

Appendix 2: Deﬁnitions of variables used (form the world values survey)
Poor are lazy refers to the question: ‘‘Why, in your opinion, are there people in this
country who live in need? Here are two opinions: Which comes closest to your
view? 1. They are poor because of laziness and lack of will power, 2. They are poor
because society treats them unfairly’’. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while
Group 2 is that answering option 2.
Run by a few big interests refers to the question: ‘‘Generally speaking, would you
say that this country is run by a few big interests looking out for themselves, or that

the people’’. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while Group 2 is that answering
option 2.
Workers should follow instructions refers to the question: ‘‘People have different
ideas about following instructions at work. Some say that one should follow one’s
superior’s instructions even when one does not fully agree with them. Others say
that one should follow one’s superior’s instructions only when one is convinced that
they are right. With which of these two opinions do you agree? 1. Should follow
instructions, 2. Depends, 3. Must be convinced ﬁrst.’’ Group 1 is that answering
option 1, while Group 2 is that answering options 2 and 3.
Jobs for men refers to the question ‘‘Do you agree or disagree with the following
statements? When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women.
1. Agree, Neither Agree nor Disagree, 3. Disagree’’. Group 1 is that answering
option 1, while Group 2 is that answering option 3.
More respect for authority refers to the question: ‘‘I’m going to read out a list of
various changes in our way of life that might take place in the near future. Please tell
me for each one, if it were to happen, whether you think it would be a good thing, a bad
thing, or don’t you mind? Greater respect for authority. 1. Good, 2. Don’t mind, 3.
Bad’’. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while Group 2 is that answering option 3.
Less emphasis on money refers to the question: ‘‘I’m going to read out a list of
various changes in our way of life that might take place in the near future. Please tell
me for each one, if it were to happen, whether you think it would be a good thing, a
bad thing, or don’t you mind? Less emphasis on money. 1. Good, 2. Don’t mind, 3.
Bad’’. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while Group 2 is that answering option 3.
Acceptable to cheat refers to the question: ‘‘Please tell me for each of the
following statements whether you think it can always be justiﬁed, never be justiﬁed,
or something in between, using this card. Cheating on taxes if you have a chance
(scale 1–10 is shown with Never Justiﬁable below 1 and Always Justiﬁable below
10)’’. Group 1 is that answering options 1 and 2, while Group 2 is those answering
options 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 10.
Competition good refers to the question: Now I’d like you to tell me your views on
various issues. How would you place your views on this scale? 1 means you agree
completely with the statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with the
statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in between, you can choose
any number in between. A scale is shown with a 1–10 scale with the words
‘‘Competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and develop new ideas’’ below
1 and ‘‘Competition is harmful. It brings out the worst in people’’ below 10.

World Value Survey. Wave 3 1995–1998 Ofﬁcial Aggregate v.20140921. World Values Survey
