AE

Carbon-footprint Policy of the Top Ten Global Retailers:
Contribution to Sustainable Development

CARBON-FOOTPRINT POLICY OF THE TOP TEN GLOBAL RETAILERS:
CONTRIBUTION TO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Carmen Bălan∗
The Bucharest Academy of Economic Studies, Romania

Abstract
The goal of the article is to study the policy of the most prominent ten global retailers
relative to the reduction in their carbon footprint. This policy is an integral part of the
environmental component of the organizational policy for sustainable development. The
research has an exploratory character and is based on the analysis of public information
available on the Internet about the objectives, strategies and achievements of the top ten
global retailers in the field of carbon-footprint. According to the research objectives, the
main results of the study reveal: the organizations that have sustainable development
objectives and policies as well as carbon-footprint objectives and policies; the strategies
applied for the reduction in their carbon footprint and the results obtained. Are the top ten
global retailers a benchmark as regards the carbon-footprint policies? Do they represent a
model which has to be followed by other retailers? Several answers may be found in the
present article.
Keywords: sustainable development, environmental assessment, ecological footprint,
carbon footprint, greenhouse gas emissions, global retailers
JEL Classification: M1, M16

Introduction
Experts became aware of the signs of developmental and environmental crisis in the 1970s.
The limits of growth were highlighted by ecologists (Meadows, et al., 1972). The term
“sustainability” appeared in the economic vocabulary to describe an economy in
equilibrium with basic ecological support systems (Stivers, 1976).
The concept of “sustainable development” has captured the attention of experts and world
organizations starting with late 1980s. The awareness of the topic was triggered by the
Brundtland Report (known under the title “Our Common Future”) which was prepared by
the World Commission on Environment and Development chaired by the Norwegian prime
minster Gro Harlem Brundtland. The report presented in 1987 defined the concept of
sustainable development in an explicit and simple manner that remained relevant until
∗

Author’s contact: e-mail: cbalan@ase.ro

without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (United
Nations General Assembly, 1987, p. 54). As highlighted by the report, the three
components of the new concept are the following: environmental protection, economic
growth and social equity.
The concept of sustainable development led to the first Earth Summit, respectively the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) at Rio de Janeiro
(Brazil) in June 1992. The objective of the conference was to build upon the Brundtland
Report and respond to global environmental challenges related to biodiversity, climate
change and forest management. The summit has declared that the right to development
must be fulfilled so as to equitably meet developmental and environmental needs of present
and future generations. Among the signed agreements range the Framework Convention on
Climate Change and Agenda 21 (called a “blueprint” for sustainable development). In
December 1992, the UN General Assembly established the UN Commission on Sustainable
Development (CSD) to ensure the effective follow-up of the Earth Summit.
Today, sustainable development is viewed from a triple perspective (Strange & Bayley,
2008, p. 30). Firstly, sustainable development is a conceptual framework that is able to
promote a more holistic and balanced approach at world scale. Secondly, it is a process that
consists in considering the integrated impact on society, environment and economy of each
decision made. Thirdly, it is an end goal that requires specific policies and solutions.
The concept of sustainable development was adopted progressively by world organizations,
countries and an increasing number of companies. From a simple concept employed by
experts, sustainable development became the objective of macro-policies/strategies. The
European Union has a Sustainable Development Strategy (EU SDS) and revised it in 2009.
The SDS reflects the long-term vision of the EU according to which sustainability implies
three mutually supportive components: economic growth, social cohesion and
environmental protection (Commission of the European Communities, 2009, p. 2). The EU
has taken the lead at international scale in the fight against climate change and is committed
to promoting a low-carbon, knowledge-based, resource-efficient economy.
The EU approach to sustainable development is also reflected by the launch of an Action
Plan on Sustainable Consumption and Production in 2008. The Commission called for the
establishment of a Retail Forum. In March 2009, European retailers set up voluntarily the
Retailers Environmental Action Programme (REAP) in order to facilitate the
communication with the Commission and other stakeholders (producers and key consumer
bodies) as well as the actions of the retail members (European Retail Round Table,
EuroCommerce, 2009, p. 2). REAP stimulates companies to assume responsibilities for
sustainable development by encouraging them to publicly record their individual
sustainability commitments. Twenty European companies and four federations have already
signed the REAP. The Programme relies on two pillars: the Retail Forum and the Matrix of
environmental Action Points (MAP). The Retail Forum aims at contributing to the
reduction in the environmental footprint of the retail sector and of its supply chain, to the
promotion of more sustainable products and to the better information of consumers.
During the last two decades, significant strides have been made to create methods and tools
for the systematic evaluation of the environmental aspects related to a good or service
through the sequence of stages that represent its life cycle. A new concept gained ground -

environmental life-cycle assessment (LCA). The approach emerged in the 1980s. It became
popular mostly in Europe, while in the U.S. started only recently to be adopted by
companies. International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) contributed substantially to the positive trend.
ISO has developed general standards to be a reference at world scale. The organization
elaborated the standards ISO 14040:2006 (ISO, 2006a), ISO 14041:2006 (ISO, 2006b), ISO
14042:2006 (ISO, 2006c), ISO 14043:2006 (ISO, 2006d) and ISO 14044:2006 (ISO,
2006e) relative to environmental management – life cycle assessment. These standards
refer to the principles and framework, goal and scope definition and inventory analysis, life
cycle impact assessment, life cycle interpretation, requirements and guidelines for LCA.
UNEP is a catalyst for the development of more specific methodologies for LCA (OECD,
2005, p. 55). The programme has supported the LCA approach since the late 1990s (UNEP,
1996). It considers the LCA an analysis that covers the entire life cycle of a product from
the extraction and processing of raw materials to the recycling and disposal. The
assessment considers various types of environmental impact such as the use of scarce
resources, the release of hazardous materials as well as the impact on local environment and
the effects on global problems like ozone depletion and climate change.
Researchers started to systematically compare the life-cycle greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions associated with various types of food products. A relevant example is a study
performed on the United States market that led to a holistic model that includes all GHG
emissions in food supply chains (Weber & Matthews, 2008, pp. 3508-3513). The research
results highlighted that GHG emissions associated with food are dominated by the
production phase within the product life cycle. Thus, production phase contributes 83% of
the average U.S. household’s 8.1 t CO2-equivalent/year GHG footprint for food
consumption, while transportation (mainly of agricultural products from producers to food
processors) contributes 11% and the final delivery from producer to retailer only 4%.
According to this study, food transportation due to globalization of the market has only
increased the GHG emissions by 5%.
Experts, international organizations and population started to employ the term “ecological
(environmental) footprint” (EF). In essence, the EF analysis evaluates the human impact on
the Earth’s ecosystems (OECD, 2006, p. 153). It measures the resources required to sustain
households, communities, regions and nations. EF represents the amount of biologically
productive land and sea area needed to both regenerate the resources consumed by mankind
and to render harmless the corresponding waste. In 2001, the global ecological footprint
was 13.5 billion global hectares (gha), respectively 2.2 global hectares per person. These
figures exceeded the global biocapacity by 0.4 global hectares per person or 21% (WWF &
Global Footprint Network, 2005, p. 6). The deficit sharpened until 2005 when the global
ecological footprint was 17.5 billion gha, respectively 2.7 gha per person, while the total
available biocapacity was only 2.1 gha (WWF, ZSL & Global Footprint Network, 2008,
p.14). The deficit increased to 29%.
“Carbon footprint” also captured the attention of both specialists and population. The
reason is that carbon dioxide (CO2) has the largest share in the greenhouse gas emissions.
According to the OECD Factbook 2009 (OECD, 2009, p. 190), the global emissions of CO2
have risen by 99% or an average of 2.0% per year, since 1971 when the total CO2 emissions
from fuel combustion amounted to 14,095 million tonnes. The experts estimate an
per year).
The carbon footprint (CF) - also named carbon profile - is a component of the ecological
footprint. Carbon Trust – the independent company created by the British Government in
2001 and which helped companies from the U.K to save 2 million tons of CO2 from their
emissions in 2008 – gave a concise and relevant definition of carbon footprint (Carbon
Trust, 2007). According to Carbon Trust definition, the CF is the total set of GHG
emissions caused directly and indirectly by an individual, organization, event or product
expressed as CO2-equivalent.
For a specific product, the CF reflects the GHG emissions corresponding to all the stages of
that product life cycle. CF is a data sub-set of the life-cycle assessment (LCA). In essence, a
carbon footprint is a LCA with the analysis limited to emissions that have an effect on
climate change (EPLCA & EC-JRC, 2009). The main GHG considered when measuring CF
are the following: carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), perfluorocarbons (PFCs). A
specific value of the indicator Global Warming Potential (GWP) is associated to each
category of GHG. The GWP indicator is defined as the potential relative climate change
effect per kg of a greenhouse gas over a fixed time period, such as 100 years (GWP100). The
overall climate change impact of a product over its life cycle is calculated by adding the
GWP values corresponding to different emissions.
During the past decade, large companies started to prepare corporate responsibility reports
and sustainable development reports, besides the annual and financial reports. In addition,
company ranking studies from the perspective of corporate governance have been made by
specialized organizations. An example of such study is that commissioned by Ceres (a
leading coalition of investors, environmental groups and other public interest organizations
working with companies to address sustainability challenges) to RiskMetrics Group
(Cogan, et al., 2008). The Ceres report is based on a specific assessment approach called
“Climate Change Governance Framework” (CCGF). The framework employs a 100-point
scale and includes 15 indicators grouped in five weighted sections: board oversight (12%);
management execution (20%); public disclosure (14%); emissions accounting (16%);
strategic planning and performance (38%). Based on this framework, the highest score was
79. Scores higher than 50 point were obtained by the following retailing companies (from
those included in the sample): Tesco plc (78 points); Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (69 points);
Hennes & Mauritz AB (54 points); Carrefour S.A. (52 points) (Cogan, et al., 2008, p. 11).
This ranking is significantly different from the retail sales hierarchy.
The trend towards environment stewardship leaves the place for more specific perspectives
such as LCA, EF and CF assessment. The goal of the present article is to study the policy of
the most prominent ten global retailers relative to the reduction in their carbon footprint.
1. Methodological aspects of the research
The terms “carbon footprint” or “carbon profile” became omnipresent for an increasing
number of organizations, individuals and countries. The present article focuses on the
carbon-footprint policies applied by the top ten retailers at global scale. The main
objectives of the research consist in identifying: (i) the organizations that have sustainable

development objectives and policies; (ii) the organizations that have carbon-footprint
objectives and policies; (iii) the carbon-footprint strategies they apply; (iv) their results.
The study has an exploratory character. This option is the most suitable because the
orientation of companies towards sustainable-development policies is still in a preliminary
stage about which few consolidated data exist. While the elaboration of an annual or
financial report is a legal obligation for a publicly traded company, a sustainable
development report is far from being mandatory. However, major groups/companies have
initiated a new trend by publicly expressing their commitment to sustainable development
in general and to the reduction of carbon-footprint and greenhouse gases in particular.
The data about the carbon-footprint policy of the top ten global retailers was collected from
sustainable development reports or corporate responsibility reports. The Internet was
selected as data source, due to the international dimension of the research.
The study focused on a sample of ten global retailers. The selection is based on two
reasons. Firstly, the top global retailers are leaders in their field and may have a significant
impact upon other retailers, being a potential source of successful case studies and best
practices. Their presence in many countries can engender a multiplying effect able to
promote a higher commitment towards environment as well as the design and
implementation of effective policies aiming at reducing the carbon footprint. Secondly, the
size of the sample was limited to ten global retailers due to the exploratory character of the
research.
The top ten global retailers have been identified based on one of the best known and well
documented hierarchies published annually. The source is the latest report of Deloitte
(2009) on the global powers of retailing. The ranking of these global retailers at the top of
the hierarchy is based on the retail sales achieved. In 2007, the value of their total retail
sales has been USD 1,071,328 million, representing approximately 30% of the retail sales
of the top 250 global retailers (table no. 1).
Table no. 1: The hierarchy of top ten global retailers in 2007
Retail
sales
rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
56

2002Share in the
2007
No. of
Country Retail sales retail sales of
countries of Retail
Company
of origin (USD mil.) top 250 global
sales
operation
retailers (%)
CAGR*
Wal-Mart Stores, U.S.
374,526
10.35
14
10.3
Inc.
Carrefour S.A.
France
112,604
3.11
33
3.6
Tesco plc
UK
94,740
2.62
13
12.4
Metro AG
Germany
87,586
2.42
32
4.6
The Home Depot, U.S.
77,349
2.14
7
5.8
Inc.
The Kroger Co. U.S.
70,235
1.94
1
6.3
Schwarz
Germany
69,346e
1.92
24
12.6
Unternehmens
Treuhand KG
Target Corp.
U.S.
63,367
1.75

Costco
U.S.
Wholesale Corp.
Aldi Gmbh &
Germany
Co. oHG

63,088

1.74

8

10.7

58,487 e

1.62

15

4.3

Total
1,071,328
29.61
Note: *CAGR = Compound Annual Growth Rate; e = estimate.

Source: Based on Deloitte Development LLC (2009). Feeling the squeeze. Global powers
of retailing 2009. Stores, January 2009, pp. G6-G7. [Online] Available at:
http://www.nxtbook. com/nxtbooks/nrfe/stores_globalpowers0109/ [Accessed 9 September
2009].
The range of retail formats developed by the top ten global retailers is relatively large and it
includes the following: apparel/footwear specialty, cash & carry/warehouse clubs,
convenience stores, department stores, discount stores, discount department stores,
electronics specialty, other specialty stores, home improvement stores,
hypermarkets/supercenters/superstores, supermarkets.
For two of the retailers - Kroger and Target - the term “global” is employed to highlight the
size of the retail sales, not the presence in several countries.
2. Objectives and policies
The research aimed to identify the retailers that have established sustainable development
objectives and policies, as well as carbon-footprint objectives and policies. Six of the top
ten global retailers have publicly presented sustainable objectives and policies: Wal-Mart
(Wal-Mart Stores, 2009), Carrefour (Carrefour, 2009a; Carrefour, 2009b), Tesco (Tesco,
2009a; Tesco, 2009b), Metro (Metro Group, 2009), Kroger (Kroger, 2009) and Target
(Target, 2008). Most of them have elaborated sustainable development reports, while Tesco
and Target have corporate responsibility reports. No publicly released reports were
identified for four players of the top ten: Home Depot, Schwarz Unternehmens Treuhand
KG, Costco Wholesale Corp. and Aldi Gmbh & Co. oHG. Thus, these four players have not
been analyzed within the framework of the present research.
The sustainability objectives have been studied from two perspectives – the scope and the
formulation. The scope includes the aspects to which the objectives refer. The analysis of
the formulation focuses on the extent to which objectives are concise and SMART
(specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and time bound).
The sustainability approaches of most of the six players encompass all the three sustainable
development pillars. For example, Carrefour group attaches an equal importance to the
economic, social and environmental components of sustainability. A proof is the existence
of a distinct scorecard for each component within the sustainability report. Each scorecard
specifies stakeholders, key figures, commitments and objectives. Tesco, Target and to a
large extent Wal-Mart and Metro group also consider all the three pillars. However, Kroger
is focused on environmental and social components.
The global retailers formulated sustainability objectives in different manners. For example,
Wal-Mart is a global retailer with clearly defined sustainability objectives. The group has
set objectives for the economic, social and environmental fields. For example, the three
sustainability goals related to environment are: (i) to be supplied 100% by renewable
energy; (ii) to create zero waste; (iii) to sell products that sustain own resources and the
environment (Wal-Mart Stores, 2009, p. 16). For each goal, SMART commitments are
presented. Similarly, Carrefour had an extremely large range of sustainability objectives in
2008: 16 in the economic scorecard, 17 in the social scorecard and 16 in the environmental
scorecard (Carrefour, 2009a, pp. 22, 36, 50). However, many of the objectives listed by
Carrefour in these scorecards are rather strategies than objectives (for example “insure
value for money in all segments”, “employ a policy in favor of diversity in all the
countries” or “promoting waste sorting and recycling”). In addition, few objectives are
quantitatively expressed. Tesco is a very good example of global retailer with SMART
sustainability objectives. The group has set key performance indicators (KPI) and a specific
target for each KPI for the year 2009 compared to the target and performance of 2008
(Tesco, 2009b, p. 51). For example, Tesco set as objective for 2009 to increase up to 99%
the share of eligible products with nutritional on front-of-pack GDA (guideline daily
amounts) labeling in the total number of eligible brands, from the level of 92% achieved in
2008. The Metro Group and Kroger also have SMART sustainability objectives. However,
Target does not state in a concise and SMART manner such objectives.
Besides sustainability objectives, the research also focused on the existence of a clearly
defined sustainability policy. All the six global retailers have publicly presented such
policies. Some of these policies are systematically specified. In the case of Wal-Mart, the
sustainability policy related to environment is concisely labeled “sustainability 360”. The
approach aims to engage Wal-Mart and the members of the entire global supply chain
(suppliers, associates, customers) to reduce their environmental impact.
The identification of carbon-footprint objectives and policies in the sustainability reports or
corporate responsibility reports of the six global players has been a distinct aim of the
research. The terminology varies. Wal-Mart and Tesco include the carbon-footprint
strategy in the climate strategy, respectively climate change strategy.
SMART objectives related to carbon foot-print are specific to Wal-Mart, Tesco and Metro
Group. Wal-Mart has three climate change goals: (i) to reduce greenhouse gases at the
existing stores, Sam’s Club facilities and distribution centers around the world by 20% by
2012 (2005 baseline); (ii) to design and open a viable store prototype that is 25-30% more
efficient and produce up to 30% fewer GHG emissions by the end of 2009 (2005 baseline);
(iii) to double own fleet efficiency in the US by 2015 (2005 baseline) (Wal-Mart Stores,
2009, p. 37). Tesco is also an example for SMART objectives (Tesco, 2009b, p. 11).
Against a baseline of 2006, the group wants to halve: (i) emissions from existing buildings
by 2020; (ii) distribution emissions of each case of goods delivered by 2012; (iii) emissions
from new stores by 2020. Tesco has disclosed own carbon footprint for 2008: 4.9 million
tons of CO2-equivalent. Metro Group set a SMART objective: “to reduce CO2 emissions
from 406 kg per square meter of selling space in 2006 by 15% by the year 2015” (Metro
Group, 2009, p. 9). Carrefour group did not present in its report SMART carbon-footprint
objectives. There are general formulations such as “reduce GHG emissions linked to store
operations” (Carrefour, 2009a, p. 50). Kroger does not present specific carbon-footprint
objectives. However, indirectly, objectives related to the reduction in energy consumption
have an impact on carbon-footprint. For example, using year 2000 as a base, Kroger aims at
reducing the overall energy consumption of its stores by 30% by 2010 (Kroger, 2009, p. 8).

but does not specify SMART objectives related to carbon-footprint.
Even if the six global players have formally expressed their commitment to sustainable
development, not all have specified SMART objectives and detailed and systematic
policies. Most objectives and policies refer to all the three components of sustainability
(economic, social and environmental aspects). As regards the carbon-footprint objectives,
the SMART objectives are identifiable for only three global players. A SMART approach
of the objective-setting seems to lead to clearer and more systematic presentations of the
carbon-footprint policies.
3. Carbon-footprint strategies and their results
The carbon-footprint policy of each global retailer is based on specific strategies and
generates certain outcomes. However, the terminology used in their sustainability/corporate
responsibility reports only rarely includes the terms “policy” and “strategy” to
systematically present and detail own approach to carbon footprint. In addition, retailers
seldom present distinctly their carbon-footprint policy. Most of the time, they refer to
environmental policy, climate policy, environmental footprint. Consequently, the content of
the carbon-footprint policy is revealed in a rather indirect than direct manner.
The information provided by the reports allows the identification of several carbonfootprint strategies employed by the six global retailers. Two sets of carbon-footprint
strategies are implemented to different extents by these retailers. The former refers to own
carbon footprint, in order to reduce the direct impact on the environment and climate. The
latter is centered on the carbon footprint of the supply chain partners (suppliers and
customers), in order to diminish the indirect impact on the environment and climate.
The strategies from the first set which refers to own carbon footprint are the following: (i)
investing in renewable energy; (ii) increasing energy efficiency of own existing and new
buildings/stores; (iii) assigning energy champions; (iv) centralized energy management
system; (v) improving the energy efficiency of own trucks; (vi) use of alternative modes of
transportation; (vii) backhauling; (viii) reducing own consumption of industrial products
such as paper, packaging, check-out bags and consequently the carbon-footprint generated
by their production. Several examples of such strategies are presented hereinafter.
To diminish own footprint, Wal-Mart has invested in renewable energy generated by a
combination of wind and solar power projects (Wal-Mart Stores, 2009, p. 37). For 2009,
Wal-Mart expects to produce 16 to 18 million kWh due to solar energy systems installed in
20 own stores from the U.S. and to consequently reduce its GHG emissions by 6,000 to
8,000 metric tons per year. Simultaneously, Wal-Mart entered a four-year wind power
purchase agreement with Duke Energy for 350 own stores and facilities located in Texas.
Due to this project, the company will avoid producing 139,870 metric tons of CO2
emissions. Similar projects have started in Mexico, Canada, Puerto Rico and Japan.
Tesco uses alternative energy to reduce own carbon footprint of own sites. The energy
sources are wind, sun, bio-gas, combined heat and power, as well as combined cooling, heat
and power (Tesco, 2009b, p. 9). For example, ¾ of the energy consumed at the distribution
center of Fresh and Easy (California, U.S.) are generated by 46,450 square meters of solar
panels. In UK, due to solar and wind energy, Tesco expects to reduce the CO2 emissions by
6,000 tons annually. As a first phase, 1200 sq.m. of solar panels were installed at the
distribution center in Postrizin (Czech Republic) in 2009. The panels are expected to save
30 tons of CO2 per year.
To improve the energy efficiency of own distribution centers, Wal-Mart employed the
following tactics: retrofitting lighting fixtures, use of energy demand monitoring systems,
integrating glycol cooling into the refrigeration system, installation of rapid doors, use of
variable frequency drives in the refrigeration system, installation of solar panels and wind
turbines (Wal-Mart Stores, 2009, p. 45). Wal-Mart also aims to design a viable store
prototype that is 25-30% more efficient than existing stores and decreases by 90% the
refrigerant use compared to the average own supercenter (Wal-Mart Stores, 2009, p. 28).
Carrefour energy consumption diminished by country and retail format (Carrefour, 2009a,
p. 67). The 6% reduction in energy consumption of the group in 2008 compared to 2007 is
equivalent to the annual energy consumption of 71 hypermarkets or a city of 75,000 French
households (Angers, Grenoble). In 2008, hypermarkets (that represent 61% of the group’s
energy consumption) reduced their consumption by 7.8%.
Tesco opened in January 2009 a new store format which is friendlier to the environment.
The store is located in Cheetham Hill, Manchester (Tesco, 2009a, p. 2). The new format
will be a model for future stores because it has a 70% smaller carbon-footprint than an
equivalent store built in 2006. The savings were achieved through energy efficiency
measures (31%), use of natural refrigerants (20%) and use of natural, sustainable fuel in a
Combined Cooling, Heat and Power plant (19%).
Another strategic initiative of Tesco is the training of thousands of staff members to be
Energy Champions (Tesco, 2009a, p. 8). They have the responsibility to ensure that energy
is not wasted and to encourage their colleagues to act similarly. Simultaneously, Tesco has
reduced by 50% own energy use per square foot in the UK stores, against a baseline of
2000 (Tesco, 2009b, p. 7). In the UK, Tesco invested around ₤ 60 million in energy-saving
and low-carbon technologies in 2008.
Metro Group has also reduced in own energy consumption per square meter. In 2008,
group-wide, the level of energy consumption decreased by 2% to 436 kWh, compared to
2007 (Metro Group, 2009, p. 8).
Kroger has reduced own energy consumption by more than 24% or 1.77 billion kWh
between 2000 and 2009 (Kroger, 2009, p. 8). These savings are equivalent to 1.2 million
metric tons of GHG emissions or to 233,000 cars off the roads for one year in the U.S.
Target applies a centralized energy management system since 1989. The system is
centralized at Target headquarters and allows company-wide energy policies.
To improve the energy efficiency of own fleet in the U.S., Wal-Mart installed fuel-saving
technologies on the trucks, identified more efficient methods to load the trucks and the
cases, improved the routing and eliminated the number of empty miles traveled by the
trucks. In 2008, in the U.S., as a direct outcome of the measures for fleet energy efficiency
improvement, Wal-Mart avoided generating 200,000 metric tons of CO2. In addition,
savings of USD 200 million were made. In the U.K., ASDA has a program called “Fewer
and Friendlier Road Miles” to reduce the number of empty trucks on the road and apply
new technologies. Thus, in 2008, ASDA saved 8 million road miles and avoided the

emissions by more than 13% compared to 2007 (Wal-Mart Stores, 2009, pp. 43-44).
Tesco considered the exact measures of products in order to improve the use of the vehicle
capacities. Thus, the group filled own vehicles 42% more efficiently (Tesco, 2009b, p. 10).
Metro Group modernized own truck fleet. In 2008, the trucks have been adapted to the Euro
5 standard (Metro Group, 2009, p. 8). By the end of 2008, 40% of own trucks complied
with this emission standard.
Kroger reduced by more than 3% the miles per unit shipped in 2008, compared to 2007
(Kroger, 2009, p.10). Kroger has a significant fleet consisting of 1,800 tractors (90%
owned) and 8,000 trailers (60% owned) that make about 2,500 deliveries daily.
Carrefour uses alternative modes of transportation to reduce own carbon-footprint
(Carrefour, 2009a, p. 58). For example, the group employs river transport from ports for
imported products, rail transportation for long distances and combined rail-road
transportation. In 2008, 41% of the imported goods were shipped by river and rail. This
means 3,300 fewer trucks on the roads in France.
Backhauling implies that empty trucks that have delivered merchandise to stores are
reloaded at nearby suppliers to resupply retailer’s warehouses. Carrefour employs this
strategy to diminish the carbon footprint.
Carrefour reduces own carbon-footprint by diminishing own consumption of industrial
products such as paper, packaging, check-out bags and consequently decreases the carbonfootprint generated by their production (Carrefour, 2009a, p. 58). Compared to 2007, in
2008, the group announced a 14% reduction in free disposable plastic checkout bags
distributed, respectively a saving of 12,800 tons of CO2, the equivalent of the annual CO2
emissions of 5,000 cars (Carrefour, 2009a, p. 51).
The second set of strategies aims at indirectly reducing the carbon-footprint of retailers
based on the collaboration with the other supply chain members (suppliers and customers)
to reduce their own carbon footprint. Among the strategies applied range the following: (i)
channeling the carbon-footprint reduction efforts by products and product categories; (ii)
encouraging consolidation and pooling by suppliers; (iii) use of software for a better vehicle
planning; (iv) collaboration with suppliers to reduce the transportation distances; (v)
helping customers to reduce their own carbon footprint by selecting products and brands
based on the carbon labeling; (vi) helping consumers saving energy in their homes.
Regarding suppliers, in 2007, in the U.S., Wal-Mart has started collaborating with Carbon
Disclosure Project (CDP) to measure the energy consumption and emissions along the
supply chains of a pilot group of seven product categories: DVDs, toothpaste, soap, beer,
milk, vacuum cleaners and soda products. In the U.K., in 2007, ASDA mapped the carbon
embedded in the products of several suppliers of fresh foods like eggs, milk, potatoes, lamb
and chicken. ASDA works with 100 dairy farms to calculate their individual carbonfootprint and help them reduce the embedded carbon (Wal-Mart Stores, 2009, p. 38).
Carrefour encourages suppliers to employ consolidation and pooling strategies (Carrefour,
2009a, p. 58). In essence, consolidation refers to suppliers that organize themselves to
group their deliveries to the warehouses of the retailer using full trucks. Each truck carries

an assortment of products from several suppliers. The pooling strategy refers to the product
transportation in full-trucks from a specific supplier to the retailer’s warehouse.
Tesco has invested together with suppliers and haulage partners in new software with a
view to reducing the number of empty vehicles on the road (Tesco, 2009b, p. 10). The
results were savings of 3,590 tons of CO2-equivalent per year.
Tesco is an example for the collaboration with suppliers to reduce transportation miles and
generate carbon savings. For example, Tesco and Unilever cooperate to improve
distribution efficiency by removing 173,000 lorry miles (278,416.5 km) by 2010.
As regards customers, in 2008, Wal-Mart has created home energy efficiency centers
within nine Sam’s Clubs from Southern California. Such centers offer members from rooftop solar panels, energy-efficient appliances, next generation efficient lighting, to low-flow
toilets and showerheads. In 2009, all Sam’s Clubs will include such centers.
Carbon-labeling is employed by Tesco. In February 2009, this global retailer was the first
of the major retailers to carbon label 100 own-brand products in Ireland and the UK.
Orange juice, washing detergents, potatoes, light bulbs range among the products which are
carbon-labeled by Tesco (Tesco, 2009b, pp. 3, 11). In 2009, Tesco aims at introducing the
system in South Korea. Wal-Mart, Carrefour, Metro, Kroger and Target do not refer to
carbon-labeling in their sustainability/corporate responsibility reports.
Tesco helps customers reduce energy consumption in their homes and improve their carbon
footprint. Since September 2008, in the UK, Tesco provides home insulation services
(Tesco, 2009b, p. 12). The goals are to help 500,000 customers during a three-year period,
to cut 5 million tons of CO2 emissions and to reduce the aggregated value of the annual
energy bill of Tesco’s customers by around ₤180 million.
Conclusions
The policies aiming at ensuring the sustainable development encompass environmental
issues, besides economic and social aspects. Within this framework, the carbon-footprint
policy of companies is an integral part of their environmental responsibility. The article
presented the results of the exploratory research relative to the carbon-footprint policy of
the top ten global retailers. The importance of this research is determined and enhanced by
the following arguments: (i) scarcity of studies about the carbon-footprint policies of
retailers; (ii) absence of globally applied common procedures and regulations relative to the
reduction of carbon footprint by retailers; (iii) relatively few efforts deployed by retailers to
systematically and substantially reduce their carbon footprint.
The potential application of the research reveals a triple perspective. Firstly, the research
provides the opportunity to better understand the policies applied by top global retailers for
the reduction of the carbon footprint as integral part of their contribution to sustainable
development. Secondly, the research results are the first strides made to ensure the
possibility to compare the carbon-footprint policies of various retailers at global, regional,
national or organizational scale. Thirdly, the exploratory research may be the preamble of
descriptive research aiming at characterizing, measuring and evaluating the organizational
policies for the reduction of carbon-footprint, in the field of retailing.

released sustainability or corporate responsibility reports. The carbon-footprint policies of
these retailers are rather “immersed” in the environmental component of the sustainable
development policy than presented as a distinct policy. The reason may be the fact that
multiple factors may lead to reductions in CF. Two sets of policies have been identified –
one focused on the direct reduction of own CF and another on the indirect reduction of own
CF through the collaboration with suppliers and customers within the supply chain. The
retailers which are positive examples are Tesco, Wal-Mart and Carrefour.
The exploratory research reveled that a comparison of the carbon-footprint objectives and
policies of the top ten global retailers is relatively difficult. On one side, there are
organizations that did not publish their carbon-footprint policy as part of the environmental
component of the sustainability policy. On the other side, the approaches are very diverse
from objective specification to presentation of a detailed framework of carbon-footprint
strategies. This situation is very likely due to the fact that common reporting standards still
have to be adopted by retailers. For the moment, most global retailers highlight the
disparate aspects they have considered. A comprehensive picture about the carbon-footprint
policies requires additional further efforts of exploratory and descriptive research.
Future research relative to the carbon-footprint policy of retailers may go beyond the
objectives of the present study. Among the aspects that require further in-depth analysis,
description or quantification range the following: (i) best practices in the filed of CF
reduction of the retail companies worldwide; (ii) actual achievements - not only the formal
commitment and declared policies - of the retail companies relative to the reduction of the
carbon footprint; (iii) carbon-footprint measurement systems applied by companies and
degree of comparability of the publicly available information about company achievements;
(iv) national and regional comparisons of the specific carbon-footprint strategies and results
of retailers; (v) impact of the carbon-footprint policy on the corporate image of the retailers
among various groups of stakeholders such as: shareholders, employees, customers, local
communities etc.; (vi) stimuli and barriers that influence the commitment of the retailers to
the reduction on the carbon footprint; (vii) partnerships existing in the supply chains for the
reduction of the carbon footprint of the entire network of companies involved in the
production, manufacturing, distribution and retailing of products.
The carbon-footprint policy is a new challenge the global retailers have to face. At present,
the responsibilities in this field are not very clearly and quantitatively defined. The
formulation of carbon-footprint policies is still in the initial stage marked rather by public
declarations of commitment than by clear plans and effective implementation. However,
stakeholders will require in the near future more in-depth and systematic approaches to the
measurement, control and reduction of carbon-footprint. A new market may be created for
research, consulting and audit services to guide and verify the efforts of companies related
to carbon footprint. The future will very likely bring more precise regulations and higher
expectations from various categories of public.


