

1 Problem statement
Maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO) activities are
necessary to ensure safe and reliable machine operation.
For many MRO processes, spare parts are essential,
because their non-availability causes machine downtime. It
is prolonged in case of long lead times that entail high
operation costs. Hence, stock holding is necessary to
achieve high service levels, allowing for short machine
downtime. In contrast to high service levels and spare parts
availability, inventory costs need to be considered to attain
economic machine operation. There is a trade-off between
service and inventory costs. The point of cost-optimal
machine operation has to be determined.
For implementing weather restrictions, utilizing available information and achieving minimum operation and
maintenance cost, mechanically stressed wind energy
components have been investigated within the research
project ‘‘EloWind’’—service logistics for wind energy
turbines. In the proposed method, a Weibull proportional
hazards model (PHM) is combined with a Bernoulli
approach. The spare demand is forecasted based on wind
speeds and operating temperatures. A cost-optimal inventory level of spare parts is derived, taking into account
inventory costs of spare parts and downtime costs of wind
energy turbines. The proposed method is validated with
data of an onshore wind turbine farm.

2 State of the art
2.1 Maintenance costs
Maintenance costs comprise direct and indirect cost. They
include all costs incurred during a predeﬁned time range,


like operational costs, costs for spare parts, cost for
maintenance personnel as well as costs for machine
breakdown [1]. In the literature, the total maintenance costs
during the lifetime of a unit are referred to as average cost
per unit good time [2–4]. Minimizing the average costs per
unit good time is, apart from machine availability, the
overall aim of maintenance. Equation 1 shows all parts of
the total maintenance cost.
cIt ¼ cIi þ cIs þ cPA þ cF þ cM

ð1Þ

cIt, total maintenance cost (€); cIs, costs for service providers (€); cIi, costs for internal maintenances processes (€);
cPA, costs for machine downtime (€); cF, costs for secondary damages (€); and cM, costs for additional expenses
(€).
Internal maintenance cost include cost for maintenance
measures itself, supply of raw material, resources, tools and
spare parts as well as depreciation for operative units.
Depreciation costs accrue for wearing components operating many periods. They are based on the units’ price and
the length of the life cycle. The second cost factor, costs for
service providers, complies with the service contract
between the service provider and the machine operator. It
varies with terms of services, for example if spare parts and
repair cost are included, the operator of the machine does
not have to realize spare parts planning. If a failed unit
destroys other units, secondary damages are the consequence. The fourth cost factor comprises additional
expenses, which are common in production, because it is
often possible to produce more goods in advance and,
herewith, compensate loss of production costs. Costs for
secondary damages as well as costs for additional expenses
are neglected in the following, because secondary damages
arise randomly and additional expenses cannot avert consequences of machine downtime in the ﬁeld of wind
energy. Costs for machine downtime include costs for lost
sales or, in case of wind energy business, missing remuneration for feeding electricity into the grid. The costs are
determined by the feed-in tariff, the power of the wind
turbine, the share of full load hours as well as the duration
of the breakdown (Eq. 2).
cPA ¼ td Á f Á lj Á pv Á 24 h=day

ð2Þ

td, duration of machine breakdown (days); f, feed-in tariff
per kilowatt hour (€/kWh); lj, power of the wind turbine
(kW); and pV, share of full load hours per day (%/day).
Maintenance and spare parts stocking strategy mainly
inﬂuence the maintenance cost structure. This becomes
clear when scheduled or unscheduled renewals are considered. For scheduled renewals, maintenance time equals
repair time that accords to the minimal maintenance time.
If the renewal is unplanned, additional time intervals are
added to the repair time. These periods are caused because

123

maintenance cannot be performed. Reasons for non-feasibility are [1]:
•
•
•

missing spare parts,
inclement weather conditions and
other missing maintenance resources, like maintenance
personnel.

Inclement weather conditions might be met by maintenance planning and preventive maintenance tasks, and
missing spare parts can be avoided by high inventory levels
that can lead to high capital costs. Capital costs are calculated as presented in Eq. 3.
cLi ¼ cETi Á ððzE þ zL Þ þ 1ÞtLi

ð3Þ

cLi, spare part inventory cost per day (€); cETi, spare part
procurement cost (€); zL, inventory rate (%); zE, interest
rate (%); and tLi, duration of stocking (days).
The inventory rate accumulates costs for personnel
working in the inventory, costs for storage space and
administrative costs, which are not directly linked to
individual spare parts. If spare parts are expensive and
stored for a long time, high stocking costs are incurred.
These stocking cost are in conﬂict with the overall maintenance aim of minimal costs. The resulting trade-off
between low inventory costs and short machine downtime
is addressed by spare parts and maintenance planning.
2.2 Spare parts planning
Spare parts replace worn and defective units, which are
unable to fulﬁll their proposed function [5]. Systems
without redundant units depend on spare parts in case of
malfunctions. Predicting the amount of spare parts needed
in the future is denoted as spare parts management or spare
parts logistic. The ﬁeld of spare parts logistic is split into
the topics data preprocessing, inventory management and
demand forecasting.
Data preprocessing is used to delete wrong data sets and
to classify spare parts in correspondence to their demand
pattern or according to their procurement costs, with the
aim of grouping spare parts with similar properties [6].
Herewith, complexity of spare parts planning is reduced
and demand prediction algorithms can be utilized according to their optimal ﬁeld of application.
Inventory management as the second ﬁeld of spare parts
logistic aims at the most economic inventory level and the
procurement strategy. Well-known models of multi-echelon inventory systems are the METRIC model by Sherbrooke or the model by Muckstadt [7, 8]. The objective of
the current and future research is relaxing the restrictive
assumptions of these two approaches. Examples are models
taking into account lateral transshipments [9] or models
extensive reviews of latest and past inventory management
models [12, 13].
The resulting inventory levels of inventory management
models depend on the forecast of demand prediction
methods. There are two major groups of demand prediction: quantitative and qualitative methods. Qualitative
methods base on expert knowledge. They do not implement
historical data. Instead, these methods solely rely on the
judgment of experts, which often leads to unsatisfactory
prediction results. In the group of quantitative methods,
time series, life expectancy and causal analytic approaches
are included. The most popular time series analysis methods are [14, 15]:
•
•
•
•

moving average,
exponential smoothing,
Crostons’ method or
regression analysis.

Time series analysis methods are applied if historical
demand patterns are expected in the future. The algorithms
try to recognize patterns in the demand history and
extrapolate them into the future [16–18]. In addition to
demand data only, life expectancy models also utilize
information about lifetime of failed components and the
current age of components. By that, they convey failure
functions for the life cycle of component, which are used to
predict the probability of failure at a given instance [19].
These models have also been extended to include more
parameters, describing the probability of failure as a
function of temperature, machine stress or surrounding
conditions [20–22]. Heng et al. [23] provide a survey of
reliability-based forecasting models.
Time series analysis methods are easy to apply, but do
not offer the possibility of considering condition monitoring information, available in nearly every wind turbine.
Therefore, advanced methods are used for failure prediction, which allow for consideration of information of logﬁles and condition monitoring systems.
2.3 Proportional hazards model
The PHM represents a semi-parametric model for analyzing failure data without deﬁning a failure distribution. The
PHM has been introduced by Cox in [24] and has since
then widely been used in the ﬁeld of biology. It is capable
of integrating and interpreting parameters that describe the
load or the operation conditions of components. It is based
on parametric or a nonparametric baseline hazard function
h0(t). Inﬂuences of covariates zm are quantiﬁed by the
regression coefﬁcient am (Eq. 4).

Page 3 of 8 4

hðt; zÞ ¼ expða1 z1 þ a2 z2 þ Á Á Á þ am zm Þh0 ðtÞ

ð4Þ

h0(t), baseline hazard function; h(t; z), modiﬁed hazard
function; zm, covariates; and am, regression coefﬁcient.
The major assumption of the model is a constant hazard
ration (h1(t; z) and h2(t; z)) during lifetime, meaning that a
covariate like wind speed has the same inﬂuence on the
probability of survival at two different instances of time.
When modeling mechanical wear, the unspeciﬁc baseline hazard function can be substituted by the Weibull
hazard rate. Equation 5 presents the two parametric Weibull hazard rate.
b  t bÀ1
h0 ð t Þ ¼
ð5Þ
T T
b, shape parameter and T, scale parameter (weeks).
The model is mainly applied in the ﬁeld of medicine,
whereupon it has also been used in the technical domain
[25]. Lanza et al. and Abernethy extensively discuss different types of Weibull models for technical applications
[19, 26]. Vlok utilizes the PHM in a technical domain and
estimated the instant of maintenance [27]. Wang and
Ghodrati realized spare parts prediction by means of a
stochastic process based on the PHM [28, 29]. In contrast
to them, Tracht et al. presented a method to preprocess
condition monitoring and operational information and
implemented them into an enhanced forecast model [28,
30]. The method proposed in this paper is an advancement
of the model presented by Tracht. Demand levels are
integrated into an inventory planning approach, but do not
allow for integration of wavering surrounding conditions.

3 Approach
The power train of a wind turbine is in the focus of the
research project. There are several sensors located in the
power train that monitor various condition parameters, for
example, wind speed, power output, temperature of
mechanical components or operational time. For utilizing
this information, the PHM is extended to a Weibull PHM.
This parametric model and the cost functions presented are
integrated in the framework, shown in Fig. 1. It highlights
analysis and computation processes and their interconnection between each other.
The output of the model is the most economic stock
quantity under given environmental conditions, like
increased wind speeds that will also increase machine
breakdown costs. By comparing costs for surplus of stock
and stock-out costs, the cost-optimal stock quantity can be
calculated.


Fig. 1 Inventory planning
approach

Fig. 2 Functional system of a power train

3.1 System analysis
The integrated model is based on a system analysis process.
The aim of that ﬁrst step is an identiﬁcation of critical
components in terms of technical necessity. Crucial components need to be stored or purchased in the instant of a
request. Figure 2 presents the functional model of the main
components of the power train exemplarily. A functional
system is used for fundamental fault analysis of a system
and shows the impact of individual functions on availability and reliability [31].

123

From the functional system in Fig. 2, it can be concluded that availability of every component is crucial to
system availability. If there were two redundant components, it would have been possible for the machine to
operate, despite malfunction of one component. In the
example presented, ﬂawless operation of every component
is necessary.
For components in stock, further classiﬁcation steps will
be conducted. They include classiﬁcation regarding
demand pattern, demand level and purchasing costs.

Page 5 of 8 4

Year

1/2009

2/2009

1/2010

2/2010

1/2011

2/2011

1/2012

2/2012

Number of requests

0

2

2

0

0

0

1

0

Equation 8 presents the cumulative density function of the
Bernoulli process [32].
x
X n 
nÀm


FxðtÞm ð1 À FxðtÞÞ
ð8Þ
Pð X x Þ ¼
m
m¼0

demand [pieces]

3

2

1

historical demand data
point forecast
0.77 confidence interval
0.95 confidence interval

m, demand level during prognosis horizon (pieces).
Therefore, it is possible to calculate stock out and surplus probability, which can be multiplied with the daily
downtime and daily inventor cost, respectively.

0

years

3.3 Inventory planning

Fig. 3 Demand pattern of validation data

historical data. This is necessary because time series
analysis approaches have to take into account demand
patterns for achieving low prediction errors.
3.2 Demand prediction
When integrating condition monitoring data in a correctly
modeled and validated PHM, the result will be a probability of failure at the instant of investigation. In case of
mechanical components subject to wear, the semi-parametric PHM can be fully parameterized. Herewith, the
PHM becomes a Weibull PHM. Therefore, the probability
of failure during lead time for an individual component is
calculated (Eq. 6).
F ðt þ x Þ À F ð x Þ
FxðtÞ ¼
1 À F ð xÞ

ð6Þ

Fx(t), failure probability during period x to t, conditional
the component is operational at instant x (–); F(t), failure
probability at the instant t (–); and F(x), failure probability
at the instant x (–).
For spare parts planning, the average failure probability
during lead time of all components is integrated into a
Bernoulli process. For that reason, the mean failure probability of all components is calculated (Eq. 7). It is inserted
into the Bernoulli process that also integrates the number of
components monitored.
n
1X

FxðtÞ ¼
FxðtÞi
ð7Þ
n i¼1

n, number of components (pieces) and FxðtÞ, mean failure
probability of all components during lead time (–).
Using the Bernoulli process, the probability for 0, 1, 2,
m demands during lead time is estimated for a deﬁned
number of wind turbines or components in operation.

With the help of Eq. 8, the occurrence probability of a
speciﬁc demand level is estimated. The calculated probability combined with cost parameter of surplus material and
downtime because missing spare parts allow for cost-optimal inventory planning. For investigation purposes, the
S - 1/S strategy will be used, whereas every other strategy
could also be implemented in the model. The strategy is
chosen because stock level for expensive, slow moving
spare parts is planned at the instant of demand. The stock
level leading to minimal total costs per day is calculated as
shown in Eq. 9 [33].
!
!
1
S
X
X
ct ¼
ðm À SÞpm cd þ
ðS À mÞpm ci
ð9Þ
m¼S

m¼0

ct, total costs per day (€); m, demand level during lead time
(pieces); S, stock level (pieces); pm, probability of
appearance (–); cd, downtime cost per day per component
(€/piece); and ci, inventory cost per day per component
(€/piece).
Stock-out costs arise when inventory level is lower than
demand. The ﬁrst expression in Eq. 9 represents daily
downtime cost, caused by missing material. In the second
expression, the probability of surplus material is multiplied
with the inventory cost per day. Minimizing this function
leads to the cost-optimal inventory level, because further
cost parameter named in Eq. 1 cannot be inﬂuenced by
means of increasing or lowering spare parts inventory level.

4 Results
4.1 Validation of demand forecasting
Table 1 shows the data set used for validation of the proposed method. Demand data are clustered by years, in
which the requests took place. Because of the low sample


Logist. Res. (2015) 8:4

Forecast conﬁdence level of 0.95

Lower limit
0.63 (1) part

Forecast conﬁdence level of 0.77
Upper limit

Lower limit

Upper limit

-0.40 (0) parts

1.65 (2) parts

-1.05 (0) parts

2.30 (2) parts

size, data are not split into test and validation data. Instead,
validation takes place by comparing prognosis results of
the proposed method to established and well-tested methods, like the method proposed by Abernethy [19] or
exponential smoothing. Rabe et al. [34] propose a similar
validation approach.
In Fig. 3, forecast results based on exponential
smoothing and discrete demand data are presented.
The ﬁgure shows many periods without demand. For
that kind of demand pattern, either Croston’s algorithm or
exponential smoothing is used to predict demand [35].
There is no linear or seasonal trend in the demand pattern,
which points to the simple exponential smoothing method.
The parameter estimate a = 0.0001. When forecasting the
demand for the following 6 months, this parameter leads to
the results presented in Table 2. It presents the point
forecast as well as the forecast levels of the conﬁdence
intervals of 0.77 and 0.95. The intervals are chosen because
they make the comparison with the results of Bernoulli’s
approach possible.
One demand is estimated by the point forecast for the
following 6 months. For the upper threshold levels of the
conﬁdence intervals, two parts are estimated respectively.
The forecast results are rounded, because spare parts can
only be stored in entire pieces.
In addition to demand data, information about the lifetime is utilized for Weibull parameter calculation. This is
realized with the help of the maximum likelihood method,
including condition monitoring information. The lifetime is
calculated based on days. The values of Weibull parameters for the probabilistic model are presented in Table 3.
Investigations of condition monitoring data highlighted the
most signiﬁcant correlation between the parameter temperature of stator 2 and lifetime in this example of wind
energy turbines. Tracht et al. [30] showed that the combination of these parameters generated the best result and the
lowest p value of the Chi-square test. Contrary to the
Arrhenius law, which only takes into account temperature,
other parameters can also be used for this model, allowing
for a broader application [21].
The investigations were conducted using a Weibull
PHM, which comprises a baseline hazard function. The
baseline hazard function is determined based on failure
probability data. The parameters impacting the hazard
function—called covariates—can be the temperatures of
the generator, the stator, the main bearing or the nominal
power output. The amount of the impact of the covariates

123

Table 3 Weibull PHM parameter estimations
Parameter

Value

Shape parameter

1.17 (–)

Scale parameter

2667 days

Regression parameter a

0.0138 (–)

p value (v2 test)

0.0206

Table 4 Comparison of conventional and proposed method
Method

Point
forecast

Conﬁdence levels of
forecast
Upper limit
(0.77)

Upper limit
(0.95)

Exponential smoothing

0.63 (1)
part

1.65 (2)
parts

2.30 (2)
parts

Probabilistic method

0.64 (1)
part

–

–

Combined method
(WPHM)

–

1 part

2 parts

cost minimal stock level [pieces]

Point forecast

12
10
8
6
1/4

4

1/2
3/4

2

1/1

0
0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

0.40

average failure probability [-]

Fig. 4 Scenario analyses

on the Weibull PHM is determined by regression parameters, which are calculated, applying the maximum likelihood approach.
The positive regression parameter shows the positive
correlation between temperature exceedances and end of
life. When utilizing these parameters for demand prediction, the condition information considered in the model
also needs to be predicted. In this prediction scenario, the

assumed to rise forty times over the threshold of 100 °C.
Therefore, the outcome of the Weibull PHM is inserted to
formula 6 to calculate the failure probability of every
single unit.
As proposed by Abernethy, individual failure probabilities during prognostic time intervals are cumulated and the
mean of the failure probability is determined [19]. Therefore, the point estimate for the conventional probabilistic
demand prediction method is calculated (probabilistic
method). By means of the proposed combined method, it is
possible to estimate probabilities of occurrence of a certain
demand level. The demand level and its probability of
occurrence are used for inventory planning (formula 8).
The condition monitoring information is considered in the
Weibull PHM. The outcome of its parameter estimation,
distribution parameter and regression coefﬁcients of
covariates, as shown in Table 3, is inserted into the
framework presented in Fig. 1 (combined method WPHM).
Demand forecasting results for the three described methods
are presented in Table 4.
The results in Table 4 show that the proposed method
leads to results comparable to conventional methods. The
advantage of the combined method is the integration of
information about the lifetime and condition monitoring
data and, therefore, compensating missing demand history
information. Furthermore, it is possible to determine the
probability of occurrence and to assess the ﬁnancial impact
of stock outs and surplus material by considering environmental conditions in spare parts planning.
4.2 Dynamic inventory planning
For validation of the dynamic planning approach, parameter analyses have been conducted. During 1 year, the ratio
between the two cost parameter inventory and downtime
costs varies because wind speed inﬂuences downtime cost,
as shown in Eq. 2. Therefore, the parameter g is introduced. It is the ratio between inventory and downtime cost
per day (Eq. 10).
g¼

Ki
Kd

ð10Þ

Ki, inventory cost per day (€); Kd, downtime cost per day
(€); and g, cost ratio (–).
Varying g and mean failure probability, cost minimal
stock level for 20 operating components has been simulated. If g equals 1, stock level rises linearly with increasing
average failure probability. Whenever downtime costs are
signiﬁcantly lower than inventory cost (e.g., g = 1/4), stock
level should be increased to achieve minimal total cost.
With an increasing failure probability, more spare parts
should be put in stock. Nominal power output increases
with higher wind speeds. For example, average failure

probability equals 0.3 and g equals 1/1 during summer time.
In winter, downtime costs increase because of higher wind
speeds, which lead to g = 1/2. For cost-optimal spare parts
provisioning, stock level should be increased by one spare
part. The results shown in Fig. 4 highlight the necessity to
investigate failure probability and cost parameters, because
interdependencies between stock level and minimal total
costs are not linear for every scenario.
Forecasting accuracy of the proposed method improves
with the amount of available historical data for calculating
the remaining useful lifetime. The method is not suitable
for parts that only have a short lifetime in relation to the
planning period, because the failure rate caused by a
parameter (e.g., wind) has to remain constant during the
planning period.

5 Summary
The research work conducted within the project EloWind
made it possible to utilize information of condition monitoring systems already available and integrate them into a
novel probabilistic planning approach. The planning
approach has been evaluated and tested for slow moving,
expensive spare parts of a power train. Above that,
wavering surrounding conditions in terms of different wind
speeds are considered in the developed model. It is the ﬁrst
model to allow for consideration of environmental conditions. Interdependencies between all relevant parameters
are presented by means of parameter studies. Thereby,
stock levels can be dynamically adjusted regarding the time
of the year and lowering maintenance costs. This will
reduce energy costs generated from wind turbines and will
make renewable energy resources more competitive. The
presented model is a ﬁrst example of integrating surrounding conditions into a probabilistic planning approach.
The example calculation shows very promising results.
Further case studies and extensive laboratory experiments
to analyze the impact of additional parameters will be
conducted in the future.
