Introduction
The future is changing, and with technological developments, demographic changes, and
the impact on the planet and its resources of recent decades, these changes are becoming
more rapid and their effects more perceptible. A few decades ago people mainly related the
technological and scientific progress with economic growth, the enhancement of the quality
of life and wealth. However, the growing awareness on the current economic development,
population growth, humanity's impact on the environment, the ever-increasing consumption
and emission of pollutants do not support sustainability and will result in global economic
and social crisis and depletion of non-renewable resources. This is also amplified by the
ever-increasing impacts of climate change worldwide. In this context, terms such as
sustainability, circular economy, and bioeconomy arose as possible concepts for solving
essential challenges of the 21st century. The urgency of pursuing solutions for these
challenges are pushed by governments, institutions, politics, science, and economy. For a
sustainable and responsible change of the way society and the economy interact with the
environment, a science-based understanding of causes and effects, the development of new
solutions, business models and technologies, collaboration and knowledge sharing across
divisions and borders are necessary. It can be stated that sustainable development is
complex, multidimensional, and requires a transdisciplinary approach which involves
different fields like technology, economy, ecology, sociology, politics, science and
education (Blewitt and Cullingford, 2013).
In this article, the authors target the higher education sector. To be able to reach the 2030
Bioeconomy strategy of the European Union it is essential to enforce education within this
topic. Current students will be the managers of the future, therefore must be valued as an
important target group for bioeconomic issues. Until now only little empirical research has
been conducted to research the current state of students’ perception of bioeconomy.
Therefore, in this paper an exploratory approach aims to get first insights of the status quo
of the perception of bioeconomy amongst students of two selected German universities to
lay a foundation for future studies in this increasingly important issue.

1.

Review of the scientific literature

1.1. Developments in the European Bioeconomy and its current focal points
In recent years the concept of bioeconomy has become more important in politics as well as
in research, economy, and education. The bioeconomy got a boost in 2012 due to the
European Commission strategy “Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A Bioeconomy for
Europe”. In 2014 the EU launched the hitherto biggest EU research and innovation
programme ‘Horizon 2020’, with a funding of nearly 80 billion Euros over seven years
(2014-2020), which places a strong focus on innovation facing societal transformation
processes (BMBF, 2014). Within this strategy, the European Commission defined that “The
bioeconomy encompasses the production of renewable biological resources and the
conversion of these resources and waste streams into value-added products, such as food,
feed, bio-based products, and bioenergy.” (EC, 2012, p.2). Due to the newest scientific and
economic knowledge and the changed political context (e.g. Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), Paris Climate Agreement and some other EU political initiatives), the
European Commission has launched a review and update of the Bioeconomy Strategy and
Action Plan (EC, 2018a). Likewise, the report from the German Bioeconomy Council
bioeconomy strategies. In figure no. 1 the different strategies were clustered by focus area
and per continent.

Figure no. 1: Cluster bioeconomy strategies per focus area
Source: Authors own compilation based on the report from the GBC, 2018a

The identified common core of these strategies is the reinforcement of innovation and
development, the use of new technologies and solutions, the improvement of production
methods and the necessary transformation of society regarding usage and consumption.
Research, knowledge, education, and social participation are essential prerequisites for a
holistic bioeconomic development and a sustainable bioeconomy. Therefore, recent
research increasingly focuses on the interactions between all actors involved
(Lewandowski, 2018, Merrill et al., 2018). For example, the Fraunhofer Institute for
System and Innovation ISI carried out a workshop in January 2017 within the framework of
the research project “BioKompass” dealing with communication and participation in the
societal transformation towards bioeconomy. One of the most significant findings to come
from this workshop is that the discourse on the role of the society in a bioeconomy is still at
its very beginning. The discourse, therefore, should extend beyond just creating acceptance
for new technologies towards the question of whether a technological change may also lead
to a paradigm change in society. Thus, the effects of a bioeconomy on social participation,
values, or equity should be discussed more thoroughly within society (Fraunhofer ISI,
2018). In this context, it is vital to understand the different perceptions of the concept of
bioeconomy amongst societal groups. An Austrian study showed that the concept is
perceived in different ways depending on the societal group belonging, though a general
lack of knowledge about bioeconomy exists (Stern et al., 2018).
The University of Suceava in Romania deducted an exploratory study with students to
understand how knowledge transfer influences student knowledge about bioeconomy. They
found out that there is a moderate degree of interest to participate in bioeconomy scientific
research. They indicate that this might be a result of lack of familiarity and knowledge

regarding the topic. They could not find a difference in knowledge between technical and
social-science student profiles (Bejinaru et al., 2018). A survey in Poland investigated the
knowledge and attitudes of students regarding bioeconomy at the Warsaw University of
Life Sciences being part of the Euroleague of Life Sciences. The author showed that most
of the investigated student sample had not heard about the concept and had not heard it in
their university. However, after providing the students with a definition of the concept, 70%
showed interest in the topic and 63% even interest participating in an elective course.
Another key result of the survey was that there are paradoxical views amongst students
regarding the field of study of bioeconomy and therefore their interest in the subject was
narrow. While students in the economic field considered, that bioeconomy related to
agriculture and food-science, life science students had the opposing view majorly relating it
to economic topics (Drejerska, 2018).
Discussions on education and the role of higher education and social change were an
integral part in this year’s “Global Bioeconomy Summit” and the “European Bioeconomy
Congress”, which also saw the launch of a European bioeconomy education platform
(EBCL, 2018; GBC, 2018b). In the Bioeconomy Stakeholders Manifesto (EC, 2017) and
the 9th Bioeconomy Stakeholders Panel (EC, 2018b) the enhancement of education and
vocational training, cross-over curricula and life-long learning programmes were pointed
out as important aspects. The need for relevant and system-approach knowledge was
identified to enable bioeconomy business and the societal transition, and the demand for
close cooperation and best practice sharing.

1.2. The role of higher education institutions in societal transformation processes
Due to the challenges of the knowledge society like lifelong learning or digitalisation, as
well as sustainability issues as e.g. interconnectedness, societal challenges and relationships
steadily gain in importance. The inclusion of all supplemental tasks and activities
exceeding teaching and research at an HEI are subsumed under the term ‘third mission’
(Cervantes, 2017). Third mission thus focuses on the linking, exchange and reciprocal
interaction of universities and the civil society by supporting and developing social or
regional commitment, social innovations or cooperation with civil society partners and
companies (Roessler et al., 2015). In scientific literature, this integration of universities,
industry, and the government is discussed under the concepts ‘Triple Helix’, established by
Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff (2000), and ‘Quadruple Helix’, if the public and civil society
are additionally joined (Unger and Polt, 2017). To become sustainable, Schneidewind and
Singer-Brodowski (2014) call for a science which actively promotes transformation
processes. Universities which are consequently and systematically incorporating current
challenges into their teaching and research are thus called ‘Transformative Universities’. As
there are controversies in scientific discourse about the universities’ precise role and impact
on a sustainable society, Bien et al. (2017) argue that every university must reflect its’
individual position within the societal transformation process.
A high-quality education system is a prerequisite to sustainable and transformational efforts
as well as transparent, participative processes and a close dialogue and cooperation between
science, economy, politics and civil society. Excellence and sustainable success will be
increasingly determined by the responsible use of the competencies available in a company
or society (Herget, 2018). These competencies do not mean abstract knowhow, but specific

of transformation knowledge, which refers to a person’s common knowledge of
transformational processes (Schneidewind and Singer-Brodowski, 2015). One possible
implementation in this respect is ‘service learning’, signifying both a learning approach by
incorporating social commitment in higher education courses, and the social involvement of
a university itself. Thereby, the HEIs support the students to develop their personality, to
reflect their position about societal action, to question assumptions, (pre-) judgments and
attitudes, and to shape up a separate, differentiated view (Altenschmidt and Miller, 2016).
In special relation to sustainability, Sterling (2010-11) suggests transformative or epistemic
learning that changes people’s perception of and interaction with the world. Perception is
“the way in which something is regarded, understood, or interpreted” (Oxford dictionary,
2018). To enable this so-called ‘third order learning’ critical reflection is necessary, which
fosters a “paradigm shift and the emergence of new ways for society.” (Palma and Pedrozo,
2016, p. 16).

2.

Research methodology

This article is structured in three main parts. On the basis of systematic literature research,
there is a summary of bioeconomy related to education and the role of HEIs in societal
transformation processes in the first part. The second part contains the quantitative and
qualitative analysis and evaluation of the results of an exploratory online survey. With this
survey’s data, the authors aimed to answer the following open research questions: What is
the current state of perception of sustainability and bioeconomy among academic students?
Can the students differentiate between those two concepts? Are there differences between
groups concerning age, gender or other implications? To gain this first insight this study
explicitly dispensed with a previously given definition, to capture the students’
uninfluenced perception, that – according to the definition provided above, includes the
comprehension as well as the interpretation of a topic.
After performing a pre-test amongst doctoral colleagues and incorporating minor
modifications, the survey was conducted between 2nd of February and 5th of March 2018 at
one Romanian public University, and two German Universities of Applied Sciences
selected based on personal contacts of the authors. Both German universities offer similar
disciplines and degrees but represent different locations (in the east and west of Germany)
and study models. The target group thus were students, either full- or part-time. The webbased survey software QuestionPro was used to create this online questionnaire. In
Germany the student bodies were contacted via email, one university additionally
distributed the survey via the Facebook page of the sustainability’s rector’s office; in
Romania, all students of a master course were contacted via email request. The survey was
accessible in German and English, participation was voluntary and anonymously. The
questionnaire had in total seven questions concerning the topic (three selecting and
matching questions and four multiple-choice rating questions with a 3 level Likert-style
rating), a demographical part and the possibility to insert a free text. The average time to
complete the survey was 13.6 minutes, which goes in line with the average completion time
of 15 minutes suggested in the literature (Brace, 2018).
In total 439 participants answered the survey, and after cleaning the data sets, 403 valid
questionnaires were evaluated and statistical processed. There was a major non-response

bias based on refusal on the survey sample regarding the Romanian side as from 65
surveyed students only 20% responded and 18% were valid. Therefore, the bias would have
been over 82 points off. The authors attribute the bias to the survey period which fell into
the universities examination period which might have been the reason for students to focus
on exams and not on the survey. Therefore, the authors decided to use only the valid
questionnaires from the German students for the analysis and result presentation. The
sample can be clustered as follows (table no. 1).
Table no. 1: Description of the dataset used
GE Universities answered
Residence
Germany
Other countries
Gender
Female
Male
Don´t want to tell

426
94.90%
5.10%
25.00%
72.70%
2.30%

GE University valid (92%)
Study Model
Part-time students
Full-time students
Age Range
<30
30-39
>39

392
75.77%
24.23%
47.96%
35.97%
16.07%

Source: Authors’ calculations based on 426 answered questionnaires
from the students of the German Universities
Additionally, the part-time students reported the industry they are working in, and the fulltime students both their semester and study field (merged to either STEM-subjects –
namely sciences, technology, engineering, mathematics – and others). The authors decided
upon an explorative approach to get an initial impression. By probationary significance
tests, a-priori-hypotheses can be derived for further statistical testing. According to the
variables and either the testing of correlation or differences in means the standard statistical
tests were used based on best practices in empirical research. The third part concludes the
article with the summary of the findings and prospects for further research in this area.

3.

Results

3.1. Students’ distinction between the terms Sustainability and Bioeconomy
Nowadays many terms are used without having a clear understanding of their meaning and
their context. Hence, the authors assumed, that most of the people only subjectively and
individually interpret the terms Sustainability and Bioeconomy. As a result, they cannot
provide precise definitions or explicitly distinguish between both concepts. Therefore, without
the provision of a preconceived definition to both terms, students were asked to match eight
given characteristics of bioeconomy and sustainability to each term based on their
understanding. Three of the eight aspects were matched wrongly by more than half of the
students; only the last two aspects were correctly assigned by the majority (figure no. 2).
Overall only 5.5% of the students have given the correct matching for all eight aspects,
which confirms that both concepts could not be distinguished.

Source: Authors' calculations based on dataset of 383 (98 female and 285 male) answers
Note: * - Directly influenced by bioeconomy
The answers to the question: ‘Which of the 17 SDGs of the "Agenda 2030" can be
positively influenced with the help of the bioeconomy over the next 12 years’ give a similar
impression (figure no. 3). Three goals “Life Below Water”, “Life On Land” and “Zero
Hunger”, which are mainly addressed by bioeconomy, were ranked very low.

Figure no. 3: 17 SDGs positively influenced by bioeconomy over the next 12 years
Source: Authors' calculations based on dataset of 383 (98 female and 285 male) answers
Note: * - Directly influenced by bioeconomy
To further explore the students’ perception of these topics, the authors statistically analysed
the data with SPSS®. Both descriptive and inferential statistics were used. The
demographical data consist of categorical variables comprising two as well as more than
two groups. The variables showing the students’ correct mapping abilities were built by
counting the number of perfect matches per student within the specific question. The higher
the number of correct matches, the higher the understanding is assumed. The statistical
techniques were appropriate to the data, therefore Pearson or Spearman tests analysed if
there are significant correlations between different demographical aspects (like age or
gender) and both the ability to correctly assign the concepts and to understand the influence
of bioeconomy on the SDGs exist. Significant differences between the groups were
analysed with either t-test, Mann-Whitney-U-test, ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis-test. The
results revealed no significant relationships between the students’ ability to correctly assign
the concepts of bioeconomy and sustainability (right_map_biosust) and any of the
demographic variables. The same applies to the understanding of the bioeconomy’s
influence on the SDGs (right_map_sdg) – with the following exceptions.
There was a negative relationship between the age and the ability to understand the
influence of bioeconomy on the SDGs, which proved to be significant at the .01 level (2tailed), r = - .153, p = .004. A one-way ANOVA was conducted to assess the effects of the
students’ age. Age was divided into three categories: <30 years (M = 3.68, SD = .126),
30-39 years (M = 3.15, SD = .132) and >39 years (M = 3.05, SD = 0.413). There was one
mild outlier, according to inspection with a box-plot in category 30-39. Data were normally
distributed for each group (Q-Q plots), and there was homogeneity of variance (Levene’s
test, p > .05). The correct relation of bioeconomy to the SDGs differed statistically
significant for the different ages, F (2, 346) = 4.550, p = .001, η² = .026, which is a small
effect according to Cohen (1998). Hochberg’s GT2 post-hoc analysis revealed a significant
difference (p < .05) between the age groups < 30 and 30-39 (.527, 95 % - CI [.08, .97] ).
Thus, the ability to assign bioeconomy’s influence on the SDGs generally and significantly
declines with age. This could either be a general phenomenon or due to specialization in
specific research areas during higher degree studies, as Beijnaru et al. (2018) proved a
significant difference by education cycles showing that doctoral students showed less
interest in the topic as bachelor undergraduates. In this respect, further research should be
conducted, for example regarding generation differences or personal development life
cycles, resulting in an approach how to better inform and involve the different generations
in the social transformation process.
The variable studymode (representing the study model) was not normally distributed for
each group (Q-Q plots), so a Mann-Whitney-U-test was conducted. The correct allocation
of SDGs effected by bioeconomy by full-time students (Mdn = 4) differed significantly
from the part-time students’ ability (Mdn = 3), U = 16689.000, z = 2.732, p = .006, r = .138
(small effect). It follows that full-time students have a significantly higher ability to match
bioeconomy to the SDGs correctly than part-time students. The latter could be due to the
fact, that the researched population represents two different study models. The full-time
students’ HEI offers study courses and lectures about bioeconomy and sustainability, the
part-time students’ HEI does not. The influence of different study models and lectures
provided should be further researched on the basis of a sample covering a higher amount of
universities.
Apart from the beforementioned differences, the detailed investigation showed that neither
men nor women, younger nor experienced students, full- nor part-time-, nor STEMstudents have a fundamental higher ability to deal with the concepts of bioeconomy and
sustainability. The results show that a general understanding exists regarding both concepts,

bioeconomy and sustainability for all investigated students.
3.2. Students’ perception of Sustainability and Bioeconomy
In the survey, the authors also targeted the students’ opinion concerning bioeconomy. The
results show a gap in perception. On the one hand, the impact of bioeconomy on
educational institutes and the HEIs’ influence on politics and economy are estimated
relatively low (figure no. 4 and 5).

Figure no. 4: Sectors mostly changing due to the influence of the bioeconomy
Source: Authors' calculations based on dataset of 392 complete answers

Figure no. 5: Stakeholders’ importance to influence politics and the economy
regarding bioeconomy and sustainability
Source: Authors' calculations based on dataset of 380 complete answers
On the other hand, the question about the urgency of the need for action regarding the
promotion and implementation of bioeconomy and sustainability measures in their home
country showed a relatively high rating. To statistically analyse this discrepancy, first, a
variable expressing an overall need for improvement was built (need_action_biosust) by

summing up the perception of the importance of all improvement areas per student. The
higher the total (range 0-30), the more “need for change” is assumed. Again, after first
statistically processing the data regarding the demographical aspects, no significant
correlations could be found. Same applies to differences in means between the respective
groups. The different assessments of the students shown in the charts above have been
additionally processed in three variables: influ_HEI (expressing the degree of
bioeconomy’s influence on HEIs), imp_HEI (the students’ perception of the importance of
a HEI as a stakeholder in future bioeconomical changes) and needaction_HEI (the
perceived urgency of the improvement of HEIs and implementation of Bioeconomy and
Sustainability measures in HEIs). All these variables are categorised by 1=no indication or
less significant, 2=significant and 3=very significant.
The analysis of correlations and differences in means resulted in the following findings. All
variables have a significant positive correlation (p < .001) to the “need for change”variable. Exemplary the following boxplot shows that the mean level of perception of
needaction_HEI increases from “no indication and less significant” to “significant” and to
“very significant” as the “need for change” variable increases (figure no. 6).

no indication or
less significant

significant

very significant

Figure no. 6: Boxplot of perception of the need for improvement in all areas by the
degree of urgency of improvement of HEIs
Source: Authors' calculations based on dataset of 392 valid answers
One-way ANOVAs were conducted, data was normally distributed for each group in each
variable (Q-Q plots), and there was homogeneity of variance (Levene’s test, p > .05). This
applies to all three variables. Table no. 2 comprises the test statistics.
Table no. 2: Test statistics of “Need for Change”
Variable
Categories
1
2
3

needaction_HEI
M = 17.24
SD = 3.605
M = 20.37
SD = 3.260
M = 24.36
SD = 3.414

Vol. 21 • No. 50 • February 2019

imp_HEI
M = 20.14
SD = 4.580
M = 20.26
SD = 4.196
M = 22.44
SD = 4.020

influ_HEI
M = 20.39
SD = 4.722
M = 20.70
SD = 4.032
M = 22.76
ANOVA
Post-hoctests
(Hochberg’s
GT2)

German Students’ Perception of Bioeconomy – An Exploratory Study
needaction_HEI

imp_HEI

influ_HEI

r = .603*

r = .232*

r = .238*

F(2, 389) = 112.313
p < .001, η² = . 366**
Significant difference
(p < .001) between all
groups:
1 and 2 (-3.134, 95%CI [-4.39, -1.88] )
1 and 3 (-7,123, 95%CI [-8.38, -5.86] )
2 and 3 (-3.990, 95%CI [-4.87,-3.11] )

F(2, 389) = 12.587
p < .001, η² = .061**
Significant difference
(p < .05) between the
groups:
1 and 3 (-.124, 95%CI [-2.40, 2.16] )
Significant difference
(p < .001) between
the groups
2 and 3 (-2.137, 95%CI [-3.22, -1.05] )

F(2, 389) = 13.721
p < .001, η² = .066**
Significant difference
(p < .001) between
the groups:
1 and 3 (-2.364, 95%
- CI [-3.74, -.99] )
2 and 3 (-2.060, 95%
- CI [-3.17, -.95] )

Source: Authors' calculations based on the dataset (N = 392)
Notes: * The correlations are significant p < .001 (2-tailed).
** According to the classification by Cohen (1988), the effective power of η² = .366
shows a high effect, η² = .061 and η² = .066 both show medium effects.
The higher the need for change towards bioeconomy and sustainability is assumed in a
student’s home country the higher the urgency of improving the HEIs actions in future
bioeconomical changes, the higher the importance of HEIs as a stakeholder and the higher
the urgency of the improvement of HEIs in that respect is perceived. These results suggest
the importance of the HEIs role in bioeconomical or sustainability issues. Based on this
finding further studies should be initiated to identify in more detail the requirements
students have towards HEIs about the bioeconomical change, e.g. what type and format of
lectures should be offered or how HEIs could improve the position as an influencing
stakeholder.

Conclusions
This study showed that a person’s age and a student’s chosen study model, which in this
case also reflects the educational programme offered by HEIs, have an impact on the
assessment of bioeconomy and sustainability. Moreover, the German students surveyed
have no outstanding knowledge concerning bioeconomy and sustainability that exceeds the
average. Except for the age, in the case of matching bioeconomy and the 17 SDGs, there
are no demographic differences either. The perception of the need for action concerning the
implementation of bioeconomy in all areas of public life is only slightly above average, too.
However, the higher the need for such action is assessed, the higher the importance of HEIs
in this context is valued.
Nevertheless, this study is subject to some limitations. The students of only two universities
were analysed. As the aim of this study was to obtain initial findings on possible
differences within different groups of the population of students, non-random ad hoc
samples by self-selection samples suffice. In market and opinion research, therefore, the
criterion “fit for purpose” is proposed as an appropriate criterion instead of a global
representation of samples (Döring and Bortz, 2016). There are distortions regarding
population conditions, yet, this study’s probationary significance tests explicitly only
deliver speculative ex-post explanations, which can serve as a basis for the formulation of
a-priori-hypotheses for further studies.
Some points concerning the conception of the questionnaire could be optimised. Part-time
students could not insert data relating to their study, as vice versa full-time students could
work beneath their studies. The survey did not capture this information. Age and semester
were only clustered in categories. The scales could have been refined, as the questions
relating to the HEIs just offered the possibility to choose three categories (less significant,
significant and very significant). Students with a negative assessment could only choose
less significant or could not answer at all. Same applies to students who probably did not
answer because they do not have a notion. Though differing between bioeconomy and
sustainability in the “knowledge”-part, the questions regarding the perception covered both
concepts together.
Based on the outcome subsequent in-depth research is recommended to explore further the
interaction of influencing factors on a person’s comprehension of these specific topics, or to
bring on a broader context, for example to the different generations and their general
perceptions or the external influences on humans by business and social environment. HEIs
can benefit from this research by being enabled to conclude the improvement of their offered
study programme, to lead the way towards a paradigm shift in the critical field of bioeconomy
and towards societal transformation. If education and especially HEIs as providers of
scientific higher education focus on an education based on the needs for having a sustainable
bioeconomy they could take a leading role and increase their influence on politics and
economics. Likewise, the high ranking for “Society” in the question about the need for action
regarding the promotion and implementation of bioeconomy and sustainability measures in
their home country reflects the growing awareness and power seen in everyone to drive the
change towards sustainable food, energy and water systems based on innovative concepts and
contemporary values. If HEIs miss this opportunity, other players on the market will
substantially shape the development, probably intensifying undesirable developments, like the
concerns some students addressed in the free texts of the survey.
In these free texts, many respondents painted a cynical and pessimistic view of today’s
society, be it politics, economy or the nature of humanity. The maximisation of profits,
greed, egoism and an ‘après moi, le déluge’-attitude are mentioned as the only motives
driving the development of innovative approaches, methodologies or products. This is
assumed to result in an intentional disregard of the need of solving problems like
overpopulation, underdeveloped infrastructure, distortive effects of investment aid for large
companies resulting in a decline of R&D, and to foster only selective approaches without
covering the entire value chain, consumer behaviour, especially concerning meat
consumption and waste, or biased media coverage. Bioeconomy is expressed to be a shortterm manipulation of ecology without knowing the effects, and a contrary to biodiversity,
therefore in contradiction to sustainability. These concerns and pessimistic positions only
present individual opinions but show the need for a transparent and knowledge-based
discourse; a discourse that can only base on education. A change in education takes time,
requires a lot of feedback and experiences as well as financial and human resources but is
essential for the future, as stated by Einstein: “We cannot solve our problems with the same
thinking we used when we created them” (Mielach, 2012).

Altenschmidt, K. and Miller, J., 2016. Service Learning – Ein Konzept für die dritte
Mission. die hochschule. journal für wissenschaft und bildung, 1, pp. 40-51.
Bejinaru, R., Hapenciuc, C.V., Condratov, I. and Stanciu, P., 2018. The University Role in
Developing the Human Capital for a Sustainable Bioeconomy. Amfiteatru Economic [ejournal] 20(49), pp. 583-598, doi: 10.24818/EA/2018/49/583.
Bien, C., Sassen, R. and Held, H., 2017. Die transformative Universität in der Gesellschaft:
Ein Überblick über verschiedene Konzepte. GAIA ‒ Ecological Perspectives for Science
and Society, 26(3), pp. 259-268.
Blewitt, J. and Cullingford, C., 2013. The Sustainability Curriculum / The Challenge for
Higher Education. [e-book] London: Routledge. Available through: Taylor & Francis
website <https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9781136552106> [Accessed 24
August 2018].
Brace, I., 2018. Questionnaire Design: How to Plan, Structure and Write Survey Material
for Effective Market Research, Market Research in Practice. 4th ed. London: Kogan
Page Publishers.
Cervantes, M., 2017. Higher Education Institutions in the Knowledge Triangle. Foresight
and STI governance, 11(2), pp. 27-42.
Cohen, J., 1988. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. 2nd ed. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Döring, N. and Bortz, J., 2016. Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation in den Sozial und
Humanwissenschaften. 5th ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Drejerska, N, 2017. Employment in vs. Education for the Bioeconomy, [online] Proceedings
of the 8th International Scientific Conference Rural Development 2017, pp. 992-998.
Available at: <http://conf.rd.asu.lt/index.php/rd/article/view/564/754> [Accessed 5
December 2018].
EBCL, 2017. LODZ Declaration on a European Bioeconomy Education Platform. [online]
Available at: <https://www.biopilots4u.eu/news/lodz-declaration-european-bioeconomyeducation-platform> [Accessed 6 March 2018].
European Commission (EC), 2012. Innovating for Sustainable Growth. A Bioeconomy for
Europe. [pdf] Available at: <http://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/pdf/officialstrategy_en.pdf> [Accessed 6 January 2018].
European Commission (EC), 2017. European Bioeconomy Stakeholders Manifesto. [pdf]
Available at: <https://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/pdf/european_bioeconomy_
stakeholders_manifesto.pdf> [Accessed 6 August 2018].
European Commission (EC), 2018a. Roadmap ‒ Update of the 2012 Bioeconomy Strategy.
[pdf] Available at: <https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/initiative/1599/
publication/175722/attachment/090166e5b8b27ea1_en> [Accessed 8 August 2018].
European Commission (EC), 2018b. Newsletter 9th Bioeconomy Stakeholders Panel. [pdf]
Available at: <https://ec.europa.eu/research/bioeconomy/pdf/newsletter_bioeconomy_
stakeholders_panel_feb2018.pdf> [Accessed 6 August 2018].
Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L., 2000. The dynamics of innovation: from national
systems and "Mode 2" to a Triple Helix of university-government-industry relations.
Research Policy, 29, pp. 109-123.
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), 2014. Horizont 2020 im Blick –
Informationen zum neuesten EU-Rahmenprogramm für Forschung und Innovation. 2nd

ed. [pdf] Available at: <https://www.bmbf.de/pub/National_Research_Strategy_
BioEconomy_2030.pdf> [Accessed 6 January 2018].
Fraunhofer-Institut für System und Innovationsforschung (ISI), 2018. Erster Zukunftsdialog
Bio-Kompass im Rahmen des Forschungsprojekts Kommunikation und Partizipation für
die gesellschaftliche Transformation zur Bioökonomie. [pdf] Available at:
<http://www.senckenberg.de/files/content/museum/muspaed/BioKompass/biokompass_
zukunftsdialog_1_dokukurz_1.pdf> [Accessed 17 July 2018].
German Bioeconomy Council (GBC), 2018a. Bioeconomy Policy (Part III) / Update Report
of National Strategies around the World. [pdf] Available at: <http://
biooekonomierat.de/fileadmin/Publikationen/berichte/GBS_2018_BioeconomyStrategies-around-the_World_Part-III.pdf> [Accessed 12 December 2018].
German Bioeconomy Council (GBC), 2018b. Global Bioeconomy Summit Communiqué.
[pdf] Available at: <https://gbs2018.com/fileadmin/gbs2018/Downloads/GBS_2018_
Communique.pdf> [Accessed 12 December 2018].
Herget J., 2018. Das Triptychon-Exzellenz-Modell – Grundlagen, Konzept und
Implementierung. In: J. Herget and H. Strobl eds., 2018. Unternehmenskultur in der
Praxis. Wiesbaden: Springer Gabler, pp 145-156.
Lewandowski, I. ed., 2018. Bioeconomy, Shaping the Transition to a Sustainable, Biobased
Economy. [e-book] Cham: Springer. Available at: <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31968152-8> [Accessed 21 August 2018].
Merrill, M.Y., Burkhardt-Holm, P., Chang, C.-H., Islam M.S. and Chang, Y. eds., 2018.
Education and Sustainability: Paradigms, Policies and Practices in Asia. [e-book]
London:
Routledge.
Available
through:
Taylor
&
Francis
website:
<https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9781351614757> [Accessed 10 August 2018].
Mielach, D., 2012. 5 Business Tips from Albert Einstein. [online] Available at:
<https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/2381-albert-einstein-business-tips.html>
[Accessed 7 October 2017].
Oxford dictionary, 2018. Definition of perception. [online] Available at
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/perception> [Accessed 2 December 2018].
Palma, L.C. and Pedrozo, E.A., 2016. Transformative learning to promote sustainability:
inserting the third level of learning in management programs. Brazilian Journal of
Science and Technology, 3(9), [online] Available at: <https://bjst-journal.springeropen.
com/articles/10.1186/s40552-016-0018-3> [Accessed 17 July 2018].
Scheidewind, U. and Singer-Brodowski, M., 2014. Transformative Wissenschaft. Klimawandel
im deutschen Wissenschafts- und Hochschulsystem. 2nd ed. Marburg: Metropolis.
Scheidewind, U. and Singer-Brodowski, M., 2015. Vom experimentellen Lernen zum
transformativen Experimentieren – Reallabore als Katalysator für eine lernende
Gesellschaft auf dem Weg zu einer Nachhaltigen Entwicklung. zfwu, 16(1), pp. 10-23.
Sterling, S., 2010-11. Transformative Learning and Sustainability: sketching the conceptual
ground. Learning and Teaching in Higher Education, 5, pp. 17-33.
Stern, T., Ploll, U., Spies, R., Schwarzbauer, P., Hesser, F. and Ranacher, L., 2018.
Understanding Perceptions of the Bioeconomy in Austria — An Explorative Case
Study. Sustainability [e-journal] 10(11), pp. 4142. doi: 10.3390/su10114142.
Unger, M. and Polt, W., 2017. The Knowledge Triangle between Research, Education and
Innovation – A Conceptual Discussion. Foresight and STI Governance, 11(2), pp. 10-26.

