Under this concept, the final customer chooses the payment of a higher price for a
product, knowing however that what he paid extra would be found into an equitable
amount that would reach the producer. The ecological feature of this concept results from
the fact that the obtained income is used to improve general living conditions (access to
running water, sewage and health care). At the same time, the concept of ”Fair Trade”
supports the existence and development of a fair and environmentally sustainable trade,
meaning that the obtained revenues are supporting ecological production and are using in
the most efficient way the production factors saving as many natural resources as
possible. The role of social responsibility is to educate people to become fully engaged
players in changing the society they live in. Helping people in becoming more socially
responsible is a key objective of the present education system (Giancalone and
Thompson, 2006).
A sustainable behaviour of consumption is the key element of a long term development.
As far as this aspect is concerned, Scholl, Rubik and others (2010) have identified
successful instruments used to reduce social and environment pressures which are being
generated by consumption: information campaigns and different tax schemes.
In terms of consumer behaviour, from the perspective of reducing deforestation and
preserving the mineral resources, we can state that the most appropriate approach
referring to environment protection is the recovery of domestic and industrial waste and
recycling the products resulting from cellulose processing by using spaces properly
equipped.
Within the ecological education, it is essential that an active attitude should be imprinted
with the population with the purpose of warning the population about disasters that may
occur as a result of environmental pollution as well as the methods to prevent these
disasters.
Soron’s research (2010) points out the importance of consumption as a drive to create
and sustain “a self identity”. It is emphasised in the paper that various psycho-cultural
factors contribute to stimulating demand for goods in search of people being affiliated or
differentiated. Black and Cherrier (2010) look into the anti-consumerism practices,
motivations and values of people that tend to lead a life style appropriate to a durable
development of society.
Consumer’s ecological behaviour is formed by attaining awareness regarding the
importance of carrying out preventive actions of crisis situations and only accidentally
managing such situations. Amongst many authors that pointed out the non-durable
consumption model is Brodhag (2010) who is in favour of differentiated policies. He also
underlines that policies should not be limited through a rational model but diversified.
The author gives as reasons cultural and collective dimension of consumption, social role
of ostentatious consumption, eco services outside formal markets and diverse approaches
based on knowledge and rationality.
Society through its all formal authorities (local public authorities, government) as well as
informal ones (non-government environmental organizations, political parties, television,
citizens or community members) must form a system comprising education, information,
knowledge dissemination and continuous action so that all segments of society should
participate in this process. Now we find out that based on an attitude of ignoring the
environmental reality, many people destroy or damage it instead of being part in these
campaigns. Our study demonstrates that lack of education in general, and lack of
ecological education in particular lead to attitudes that favour the development of
destructive behaviour. Within the Romanian society there are very few isolated actions
focused on environmental preservation and almost no system policies can be found.
Mass-media can play a decisive role in educating the consumer towards an ecological
behaviour.
Excessive consumption of natural resources, together with the increase of world
population reach considerable amounts and may lead to social and economic problems.
The present day generation has been brought up to consume exaggeratedly and that is
why exaggerated consumerism tendency has to be changed and a rational use of
resources should be encouraged. People now have the obligation to design an economy
based on the use of “green energy” and the achievement of a sustainable production and
consumption. Population can and must get used to not dissipating resources and be aware
of the need to recycle as part of an environmental protection factor. Marx, De Paula and
Sum (2010) have researched consumers’ perceptions towards the factors that stimulate or
discourage sustainable consumption and have converted demand into packaging,
products, ways of manufacturing, advertisements or recycling systems.
The responsibility of various social groups related to the action that should be taken
represents a topic of great interest in the issue of environmental behaviour. Our analysis
leads us to the observation that there is no clear delimitation of the areas of action of each
participant in environmental education (non-governmental organizations, public local
authorities, government/political parties and citizens).
Starting from the above issues, two interrelated questions arise for which we do not have
a clear image regarding the behaviour of the Bucharest population in the direction of
naural resources consumption or participating in awareness campaigns with the aim of
promoting an ecological consumption of natural resources. They are:
 What is the Bucharest consumer’s behaviour towards natural resources that grow
scarce (water, fuel)?
 Which channels of information must be used to create ecological behaviour of
Bucharest population regarding the consumption of natural resources?
In order to obtain answers to these questions the methodological approach was based on a
sociological survey (Rotaru and Ilut, 2006).
The scope of our paper is to briefly highlight the importance of the ecological behaviour,
population’s information and involvement in the process of preserving the natural
resources through a responsible consumption of these resources. Using primary data
obtained from a survey based on a questionnaire, a set of three hypotheses has been tested
during our research. The first part of our paper deals with the research methodology. The
results are analyzed and assessed in the second part, which relate to the main questions
addressed to the research subjects. Then the final conclusions follow.

1. Research methodology
The scope of our work is to determine the current level of ecological behaviour of the
Bucharest consumers’ of natural resources. This study has the following objectives:
O1. Measure ecological behaviour of Bucharest citizens towards reduction of resources
consumption (water, wood, fuel, minerals);
O2. Identify the awareness level of the population on the need of protecting the
environment through an ecological behaviour of the domestic consumer;
O3. Identify the involvement level of population in activities of preserving the
environment through a civic attitude that favours the reuse of the products consumed;
O4. Responsibilities and institutional involvement in performing activities of awareness
and promoting civic behaviour to preserve the environment.
Based on the above-mentioned objectives the authors formulated the following set of
hypotheses:
 The more diverse the information channels on environmental protection and
natural resources are, the more conspicuous is the population’s ecological behaviour
towards environmental protection and reuse of household products;
 The greater the participation of citizens in activities to protect the environment is,
the higher the population’s ecological behaviour to consume products;
 The more widespread the ecological behaviour of the Bucharest consumer is, the
greater are the expectations from the organizations and institutions involved in developing
such behaviour.
The study required a sociological survey on a representative sample composed of the
adult residents of Bucharest (table no. 1). The volume of the sample was of 400
respondents aged 18 and over, the theoretical margin of error is +/- 5% at a confidence
level of 95%. The sample was stratified proportionally to the number of adults from the
administrative sectors of Bucharest.
Stages of the sampling process:
1. Setting population weight (as of January 2010) for each sector. Thus the number of
questionnaires that had to be carried out in each sector was established;
2. Setting the number of sampling points for each sector. The practice polls
determined an optimum of 10 questionnaires per sampling point. Thus, the number of
questionnaires from a sector was divided by 10 and with the necessary rounding the result
was the number of sampling points;
3. Random selection of the sampling points.

Table no. 1: Distribution by sectors of the questionnaires used within the research
Sectors

Population

Sector 1
Sector 2
Sector 3
Sector 4
Sector 5
Sector 6
Total population of Bucharest

227,717
357,338
399,231
300,331
288,690
371,060
1,944,367

% out of total population
of Bucharest
11.7
18.4
20.5
15.4
14.8
19.1
100.0

Number of questionnaires
47
74
82
62
59
76
400

Selection of households within specific areas of the sampling points was random, using
the “random route” method. The selection methodology we have employed ensures the
compliance with the randomly minimal selection criteria of the respondents when other
sampling frames (such as address lists) are of poor quality and/or inaccessible. The
resulted sample (400 individuals) is representative for the adult population of Bucharest
(total 1,667,898 adults according to official statistics from January 1st, 2010) on gender
criteria and age groups.
Interviews were face-to-face type and were carried out at the respondents’ residence by
operators who are students of the Faculty of Business and Administration, University of
Bucharest within the FP7 project no. SIS8-CT-2009-229642 - CASC - Cities and science
communication: Innovative approaches to engaging the public - Coordinator
BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL. Data collection within the sociological survey was
conducted between May 14th and 24th, 2010.
The questionnaire was developed by the authors and tested on a total of 20 subjects. The
questions were completed following the pilot investigation and were structured according
to the research hypotheses on 34 items. The data were entered into an electronic database
and there were created syntax to label the variable and response codes.
2. Data processing and interpretation
Information obtained was processed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences
software (SPSS) 12.0. The presented images and charts have been made in Microsoft
Excel.
2.1 General data about the population of Bucharest
For a better understanding of the context of this research, we shall make a brief
presentation of Bucharest. Bucharest was first mentioned as “the Citadel of Bucuresti” in
1459, September 20 when it became the residence of the Wallachian Prince Vlad III, the
Impaler. Starting with the second half of the 17th century, it became the capital of
Wallachia and in 1862 the capital of Romania.
Nowadays, Bucharest is the most important political, economic, cultural and scientific
centre of the country and is divided into six administrative sectors. As of January 1, 2010
had 1,944,451 inhabitants, out of which 907, 678 men and 1, 036, 773 women, that is
46.7% males and 53.3% females (table no. 2).

Table no. 2: The administrative organisation of Bucharest
Sectors
Sector 1
Sector 2
Sector 3
Sector 4
Sector 5
Sector 6
Total

Area
square km
70
32
34
34
30
38
238

Population as of
January 1, 2010
224,146
356,679
401,975
300,101
289,778
371,772
1,944,451

Men
100,724
165,415
188,372
140,731
139,150
173,286
907,678

Women
123,422
191,264
213,603
159,370
150,628
198,486
1,036,773

Population density
inhabitants/ square km
3,202
11,146
11,823
8,827
9,659
9,783
8,170

Bucharest’s population represents 9.1% of Romania’s total population and 16.5% of total
urban population.
Also on January 1, 2010 the number of adults (people aged 18 and over) was 1,667,898.
In terms of ethnic composition, according to the 2002 census, Bucharest is relatively
homogeneous: 97.03% of its inhabitants are ethnic Romanians, 1.42% is Roma and the
remaining 1.55% belongs to other minorities (e.g. Hungarians, Germans, Turks, Jews,
etc.).
In terms of schooling population we have a special situation in Bucharest. In Bucharest,
school population on all levels of education (from pre-school to higher education) is of
689,771. In the university year 2007/2008 there were 35 universities with 169 faculties
and a total of 389,517 enrolled students, out of which 218,782 women (56.2%). As a
matter of fact, out of the total schooling population there were 56.5% University students,
20.2% pupils in elementary and gymnasium schools, 13.3% high school students, 6.9%
pre-school children, 2.4% vocational and apprentice schools, and 0.7% in the after high
school education and foremen schools.
2.2 Sources of information and development of ecologic behaviour
The first tested hypothesis is related to the correlation between the diversity of
information sources and the attitude towards the environment and reuse of household
products: the more diverse the information channels on environmental protection and
natural resources are, the population’s ecological behaviour towards consumption of
natural resources is more active.
In specialty literature, the relationship between behaviour and attitude is clearly depicted.
As far as attitude is concerned, it greatly depends on the information and knowledge that
the individual receives (Boza,2010).
TV and Internet represent the preferred information channels used by the people of
Bucharest who are interested in actions on environmental protection (table no. 3).
Table no. 3: Channels of environmental information
Information channel
TV
Radio
Daily newspapers
Magazines
Specialized publications

Vol. XIV • No. 31 • February 2012

Relative frequencies %
61.0
5.0
6.7
1.7
Internet
Friends
Environmental organizations
Other channels
Do not know/Do not answer
Total

Relative frequencies %
15.8
1.0
2.3
3.0
0.5
100.0

Regarding the environment issue, television remains the main information channel.
Interestingly, one of six resident of Bucharest considers the Internet as the main
information channel on environment. Specialized publications and information issued by
environmental organizations are very important for 5% of adults from Bucharest. A
correlation between the information channels and the respondents’ age demonstrates that
young people prefer to find out information on the Internet, through specialized
publications; elderly people prefer top newspapers by circulation.
Within the communication about environment quality, TV shows and advertising
materials have an increasingly larger dissemination. Thus, the survey measured the
influence of direct or commercial advertisement information methods. Collected field
data showed that more than 52.3% of the working age Bucharest people have seen
billboards installed throughout the city displaying environmental and natural resources
protection themes. TV shows dedicated to protecting the environment and natural
resources have attracted the attention of 48% of the citizens of Bucharest, while the
distribution of leaflets dealing with the same topic has been observed by 39.8% of the
capital residents (table no. 4).
Who noticed these forms of advertisement? Flyers with information about the
environment were mainly observed by women and those involved in environmental
issues. TV shows on environment were watched especially by the elderly.
Table no. 4: Different information channels on environment
and the need to preserve the environment
Questions
Have you seen billboards throughout the city advertising on
environment and natural resources protection?
Have you read flyers about environmental and resource protection
distributed / displayed at your block of flats entrance?
Have you watched TV shows dedicated to environment protection?

Yes (%)

No (%)

52.3

47.7

39.8

60.2

48.0

52.0

Those who watched TV shows on the environmental and natural resources protection
were asked to indicate names of such shows and the TV channels that hosted them. The
answers given indicated TV programs broadcast nationwide by TV stations. As for the
TV channels where programs on environment were watched, 61% of people from
Bucharest preferred generalist channels, 24% preferred specialized channels and 11%
watched a news channel that began broadcasting a sustained campaign about
environment and natural resources protection.
The attitude towards the environment and natural resources was measured as a set of
statements about everyday facts from the behaviour of the citizen of Bucharest. On a scale
from 1 to 10, when 1 means totally unjustified and 10 means totally justified, subjects
were asked to express their agreement related to these statements.

The data collected show a generally favourable attitude towards the environmental
messages (table no. 5).
Table no. 5: Behaviour of Bucharest population towards
the reuse of household products

Gestures

How justified do you
think it is to throw
papers in the street?
How justified do you
think it is to throw
papers near the trash
bin?
How justified do you
find the activity of
selective garbage
disposal?
How justified do you
think it is the action of
taking the used
appliances to recycle
stores?

Average
score on
the total
sample

Average score on
the sub-sample
consisting of those
who have seen
billboards, fliers,
TV shows

Average
score on the
sub-sample
consisting of
those who
have seen
billboard

Average
score on the
sub-sample
consisting of
those who
have seen
fliers

Average
score on the
sub-sample
consisting of
those who
have seen
TV shows

1.27

1.43

1.28

1.36

1.36

1.51

1.74

1.58

1.66

1.60

8.63

8.28

8.93

8.62

8.68

8.79

8.56

8.95

8.77

8.87

One can notice that there is an unfavourable attitude towards throwing papers in the
streets or near the trash bins. A generally positive attitude can be found around the actions
of selective garbage disposal and storing the used appliances in specialized stores.
Through social responsibility campaigns, big companies are engaged in the direction of
encouraging the behaviour of recovering and recycling the household waste and
appliances.
Basically, our hypothesis is not confirmed. One can observe that those who have noticed
the billboards, have read the fliers and have watched TV shows dedicated to environment
have lower scores in the measured statements than the average on the sample level.
However one can notice that looking at billboards and watching TV shows about the
environment lead to the development of a more positive attitude when coming to collect
the appliances in a specialised recycle store. Billboards help the development of an
attitude which favours the selective waste collection. The conclusion one can draw from
the above observations is that the proper communication channel must be chosen for
sending a message.
2.3 Civic participation and individual behaviour related to environment and natural
resources preservation
A second tested hypothesis was related to the relationship of citizens’ participation in
environmental activities and the ecological behaviour of product consumption. The

greater the participation of citizens in activities to protect the environment, the higher the
ecological behaviour of population towards the consumption of products.
An important aspect in enhancing the consumer’s behaviour is represented by the
population’s general attitude towards environment. An environmental attitude is formed
by giving a very important support for shaping and developing the consumer’s ecological
behaviour. On a scale from 1 to 10, when 1 means totally unjustified and 10 means totally
justified, subjects were asked to express their agreement for a set of statements in regards
to the formation of a civic environmental behaviour. On a declarative level, the adult
population of Bucharest gives an average grade of 9.28 to activities of promoting and
appreciating the protection of environment (table no. 6).
Table no. 6: Bucharest population’s attitude towards actions
of shaping a civic behaviour in relation to the environment
Questions
How justified do you think it is to warn people that they are polluting the
environment?
How justified do you find the appreciation of actions to protect the environment?
How justified do you find the active participation within environmental
organizations?

Average grade
8.49
9.28
8.17

It is interesting that the active participation in environmental organizations is appreciated
but not at very high values. We believe that this fact is connected to the early days of
these non-governmental organizations and their poor development. The same reasons are
applicable when we warn people who pollute the environment. After a long period of
communist society, characterized among others by ignoring the environment and
environmental issues, we shifted to a different attitude, such as “there are institutions
authorized to cleanse the environment so they should do it, not the citizens”.
The specific involvement of the population in environmental actions and the development
of an active ecological behaviour are important, in addition to the statements regarding
the appreciation of the undertaken actions. Thus, the involvement level of the adult
population of Bucharest can be depicted in three words: indifference, individual
commitment and civic activism (table no. 7).
Table no. 7: Involvement level of people from Bucharest regarding environment
and natural resources protection
Involvement level

Relative frequencies (%)

I am not interested in this subject
I keep informed on this matter but I am not particularly attentive to
environmental issues
I get information and I am attentive to what those around me are
doing on this matter
I am trying to protect the environment and save natural resources
I am protecting the environment and I am trying to determine others
to be careful on this matter
I am protecting the environment and I sympathize with the
environmentalist organizations
Total

3.0
10.5
20.7
31.8
20.8
13.2
100.0

The first group consists of people who are not interested, are not sensitive to this subject
(almost 1 in 7 adult citizens of Bucharest) or are aware of what happens around them
(20%). 34.2%, about a third of the adult population of Bucharest is unconcerned by the
environmental issues and this shows a still low level of awareness of the importance of
environment in the daily lives of the residents of Romania’s capital. We called this group
“the disinterested” people to environmental issues.
The fact that nearly another third (31.8%) is trying to protect the environment and is
saving natural resources shows the actual size of the silent and cold group of the
individual consumer concerned with the environmental issue of the used products.
A third group (34%) is the one that tries individually or in an organised manner to
develop an ecological behaviour.
Ecological behaviour of consumers of natural resources is seen in everyday life, in
various activities. Subjects of the survey were asked how they act in everyday situations:
the morning hygiene routine, use of artificial lighting at home and use of thermal power.
Whole sample data show a relatively low concern regarding ecological behaviour of
consumers of natural resources. It is interesting that only in terms of room temperature
and turning off the water while brushing teeth, those who declare themselves to be
environmental activists have a more widespread ecological behaviour than the other
groups. When talking about the use of natural lighting, eco-bulbs, bulbs with less power
and water consumption when shaving / cleansing, those who act quietly and individually
have the best behaviour regarding ecological consumption (table no. 8).
Table no. 8: Ecological behaviour of the domestic consumer related
to daily activities in the household (%)
Activities
Those who turn off the water while
brushing their teeth
Those who turn off the water while
shaving or cleansing
Those who rather use organic light
bulbs than the conventional filament
bulbs
Those who rather use moderate than
high power light bulbs
Those who rather use the natural and
not the artificial lighting when
possible
Those who would use the natural
and not the artificial lighting when
possible

Sample
level

Subsample
of the
indifferent
people

Subsample of
individual
commitment

Subsample of
the activists

64.3

53.3

68.5

71.3

58.0

53.3

65.4

55.9

58.5

51.8

66.1

58.1

67.8

64.2

71.7

67.6

86.5

79.6

93.7

86.8

75.5

70.1

76.4

80.1

It is noted a classic behaviour of saving energy with a greater emphasis on using natural
lighting (86,5%), moderate heating of the room (75,5%) and use of moderate power bulbs
instead of high power ones (67.8%).
One year after shutting down the production line of the old electrical bulbs, the new types
of eco-bulbs get a fairly small percentage of 58.5%. Although seen as one of the biggest
problems of mankind - water - is still regarded as an inexhaustible resource. It may seem
paradoxical but those who exhibit saving water behaviour are the elderly residents of
Bucharest and not the youth. From the correlation of concerns towards saving water, with
the main demo-social features and with testing their correlation with “the residual
adjusted value” results the fact that water-saving is more present among those who have
been living for a long time in Bucharest, among those who are elderly, retired and
consider themselves to be concerned with environmental issues. Less concerned with the
preservation of water resources are those who have been living for a shorter time in
Bucharest, they are young and have manual occupations.
About saving energy by using less power bulbs and ecological light bulbs we can say that
there is a general behaviour, with no specific demo-social profile. Young people are less
concerned about the use of moderate power light bulbs.
The inclination to use natural lighting is more present among women, the elderly, those
who have been living in Bucharest for a long time. Men, young people and those who are
generally indifferent towards environmental issues are less attentive to this natural
resource.
Those with manual occupations and those with low income are the ones who are
concerned about thermal energy saving.
The presentation of the demo-social profiles of the groups preoccupied with an ecological
behaviour in the consumption of natural resources and household products is also relevant
in terms of target groups for information campaigns on the subject. Answers to the
question: “Who do you think these campaigns for protecting the environment and natural
resources are mainly addressed to?” show a diffuse perception of the groups targeted by
these information campaigns (table no. 9).
Table no. 9: Groups targeted – in the perception of the interviewed persons –
of the campaign shaping ecological behaviour towards the environment
and natural resources
Groups targeted of the campaign shaping ecological behaviour of
the people from Bucharest
Children
Young people
Adults
Elderly
People concerned with the environment
People from Bucharest
All citizens of Romania
Do not know/Do not answer
Total

Relative frequency (%)
2.3
14.5
6.5
0.3
5.0
37.5
32.8
1.1
100.0

It is noted that 37.5% believe that these campaigns are addressed to people who live in
Bucharest, 32.8% believe that these campaigns are addressed to all Romanian citizens and
15% to young people. Therefore we have generalist campaigns. It is odd that although
less than 1% believes that these campaigns are addressed to older people, they are the
most receptive ones to concrete actions of saving natural resources.

2.4 Individual and institutional involvement in developing an environmental
oriented behaviour
The third tested hypothesis concerns the relationship between individuals and institutions
involved in the development of an ecological behaviour among consumers of natural
resources: the more disseminated the ecological behaviour of the consumer in Bucharest
is, the greater the expectations from the organizations and institutions involved in its
development.
Testing this hypothesis implies two interrogations in the first stage in order to better
understand the individual-institution relationship:
 Who promotes the environmental protection activities?
 Who should promote the environmental protection activities?
Residents of Bucharest believe that the non-governmental organizations are conducting a
more intense information campaign than expected from them - 68% compared to 30.2%.
Residents of the capital expect a much greater involvement from the local and central
public authorities (48%), and political decision making entities (12.8%). Environmental
protection represents a problem of the city and therefore it is the responsibility of those
who are authorised to solve the city’s issues. It is an interesting fact that TV channels are
perceived as players actively involved in environmental protection (15.8%) (table no. 10).
Table no. 10: Institutional involvement and expectations regarding the information
campaigns of the population on environmental protection and natural resources
Institutions involved in environmental protection
Non-governmental environmental organizations
Public local authorities
Government/Political parties
TV stations
Community/Citizens
Do not know/Do not answer
Total

Who carries out
environmental
protection
activities?
68.0
12.5
0.5
15.8
2.0
1.2
100.0

Who should carry
out environmental
protection activities?
30.2
48.0
12.8
0.0
6.0
3.0
100.0

In the population’s view, the non-governmental organizations are much less responsible
for the environmental protection activities. Majority public opinion is that these
organizations do not have the necessary logistics and funds for such an endeavour.
Data resulted from the correlation of the involvement level and expectations regarding the
promotion of environmental protection activities show that the more concerned with the
environmental issues the citizens are, the more the expectations from government and
central authorities decrease. The correlation points out that the expectations are higher
from the part of other members of the community (table no. 11).

Table no. 11: The individual’s level of involvement in issues regarding
environmental and resource protection correlated with the institutions
which should, according to the survey respondents, promote such actions
Level of
involvement
I'm not interested in
this area
I keep informed on
this matter but I am
not particularly
attentive to
environmental issue
I get information
and I am attentive to
what those around
me are doing on this
matter
I am trying to
protect the
environment and
save natural
resources
I am protecting the
environment and I
am trying to
persuade others to
be careful on this
matter
I am protecting the
environment and I
sympathize with the
environmentalist
organizations
Total

NGO
organizations

Public local
authorities

Gov.

Community/
Citizens

Dk/Do
not
answer

Total

25.0

33.3

0.0

0.0

41.7

100.0

26.2

52.4

16.7

2.4

2.3

100.0

32.5

48.2

10.8

4.8

3.7

100.0

33.1

46.5

14.2

5.5

0.7

100.0

24.1

53.0

15.7

6.0

1.2

100.0

34.0

43.4

7.5

13.2

1.9

100.0

30.3

48.0

12.8

6.0

3.0

100.0

We learn that the stated hypothesis is invalidated. Those concerned with environmental
protection expect that others should also share their concerns. It is interesting the polarity
of opinions between those who are insensitive and those who are trying to make others
sensitive to the environmental issues. Both categories expect a greater involvement of the
local and central public authorities. Non-governmental organizations concerned with
environmental protection have support among environment proponents and also among
those who do not declare themselves supporters but are paying attention to the discussions
and practical methods of saving natural resources.
Conclusions
The ecological behaviour in consumption of natural resources has relatively small values
compared to the countries in Western Europe. Information plays a fundamental role in
forming an attitude favouring the development of an ecological behaviour of the
consumer of natural resources.
The framed hypotheses are partly validated. Thus, the diversification of information
sources is not important in the development of ecological behaviour but choosing the best
ways of communicating about these issues.
The second hypothesis - the relationship between civic participation and individual
behaviour towards environmental and natural resources preservation - indicates a poor
agreement between the civic manifestation and the individual activities publicly
expressed. The reason for that is the incipient stage of development of environmental
organizations, the poor involvement of the residents of Bucharest and the deficient
orientation of messages promoted in this direction.
The third hypothesis - the directly proportional relationship between the individual
involvement and the involvement of public institutions in the development of an
ecological behaviour is invalidated. Those concerned with environmental protection
expect from their peers to share their concerns rather than from the institutions authorized
to assume the role of formatter of ecological behaviour in the consumption of natural
resources. It is interesting the polarity of opinions between those who are insensitive and
those who are trying to sensitize the others making them aware of the environmental
issues; both of them expect a greater involvement from the part of the local and central
public authorities. Those who are individually involved in the direction of an ecological
behaviour do not expect institutions to promote these challenges: a clean environment and
ecological behaviour of the individual consumer. Non-governmental organizations
concerned with environmental protection have active support among their proponents but
also a passive support from those who do not declare themselves supporters but are
paying attention to the discussions and practical methods of saving natural resources.
This research, limited by its purpose and the size of the community surveyed and studied,
represents a starting point of studying the population’s perception regarding ecological
behaviour of the consumer of natural resources and products used within a household.
The obtained results can be working hypotheses for the research on larger samples and
the samples can be selected from cities in the country and abroad.

