JEL Classification: F18; Q34; Q56; Q57.

INTRODUCTION
Complex relationships between international trade and the environment is one of the most
significant moments of the economic development – environment correlation. The importance of
this sequence has grew in the recent decades due to increasing pressures of the economic
development on the environment and the maximizing role of international trade as an engine of
and environmental policies on the trade between countries.
With reference to the first side of correlation, it specifies that international trade is not a direct
source of environmental degradation or improvement. The potential positive or negative impact is
indirect, mediated by its effects on production and consumption. Consumption and production as
main components of economic activity, alongside with rigor and suitability of environmental policy,
are part of the fundamental determinants which influence the environmental improvement or
degradation.
From the international trade perspective, the dimension of environmental impact depends of
the amount and frequency of transactions significant conditioned by the degree of trade
liberalization. Consequently, the theoretical analysis was focused on the impact of international
trade liberalization on the environment. Outstanding contributions to this subject have been made
by a number of neoclassical theorists and the so-called “ecological economists”(like Costanza,
Daly, Hall, Jansson, Hannon, Odum, Pimentl, and Martinez-Alie) and the promoters of sustainable
development (“environmental economists”, like Hanley, Shogren, White, Wallace, Oates, and
Stavins).
The negative environmental impact of liberalization is conveyed in literature especially by the
environmentalists. They believe that at least on the short term, trade liberalization could trigger a
vicious circle of effects which involve environmental degradation. Initiation and propagation of
these effects are motivated by different situations, such as: amplification of international
specialization in intensive polluting products which are using exhaustible natural resources (mining,
forestry, fisheries, etc.); facilitation of trade with hazardous substances and waste; extension of
transport distances with carbon growth effects; stimulation for firms relocation in countries with
permissive environmental standards; deepening the nationally and internationally income gaps; the
orientation of “disadvantaged” towards consumption of natural resources whose amplification
adversely affects the environment etc.
Such negative effects are mediated by the economic growth processes and favoured by the
underestimation of natural resources and generally lack of adequate environmental policies capable
to ensuring the internalization of environmental costs.
But most of these debates participants contest the environmentalists’ points of view,
describing the environmental impact of international trade as positive. Especially, the liberalization
adepts (Beckerman, 1992; Barbier, 1994; Markandaya, 1988; Copeland and Talyor, 1994) believe
that trade and investment barriers reduction generates wealth, including the movement of

the welfare is likely to increase living standards, the demand for a cleaner environment and finally
the environmental protection. In general, the positive environmental impact of international trade
liberalization is supported by numerous arguments relating to such issues:
- Efficient allocation of the environmental resources that determines the improve of
production structure for goods less intensive in natural resources, based on lower energy
consumption and lower degree of pollution;
- Facilitation of international transfer of environmental and less polluting technologies. Trade
openness facilitates such the abandonment of old, inefficient and polluting (the former communist
countries) power plants in favour of the modern one with combined cycle which encourages the use
of alternative sources: wind, solar and tidal. Including the multinational companies, often
considered criminals in terms of exploitation of developing countries resources, are interested and
can afford new, efficient and less polluting technologies. As a result there is an intensive
modernization and revitalization of polluting sectors previously protected;
-Convergence of environmental standards of products and processes to the highest levels in
the world. Thus, more stringent environmental policies from developed countries may be imported
into countries with lax standards voluntarily in the context of enhancing mutual relations or
involuntarily by treating with trade sanctions, or following the adoption of new regulations aimed
for harmonizing the environmental standards;
- Encouraging the development of organic products markets;
- Elimination of subsidies and distorted prices in closed economies including the alignment of
world prices;
- Encouragement of international cooperation regarding the environmental protection, etc.
As a synthesis of the arguments presented above, in the literature was detailed a broad
typology of environmental effects of trade liberalization. The most representative is the approach
proposed by the OECD (OECD, 2000 and Sprenger, 1997, p. 29). According to this, reported to
international trade in goods, by the nature and scope of their manifestation can be distinguished two
main classes of effects: those that define the economic impact and those that target the impact of
trade liberalization in the legal framework.
In the first class are framed: the scale effect, the structural effect, the effect of product and
technological effect.
The scale effect as a propagation mechanism takes place at the macro-economic level: trade
liberalization generates an enhanced role of trade that involves increased economic activity, and

use of environmental resources, possibly even an environmental degradation. The scale effect is
positive if the growth process creates an increasing demand for environmental improvement and the
financial gains are allocated for this purpose. Conversely, scale effects are negative in the absence
of a proper environmental management and conditions an excessive use of natural resources,
increasing pollution and failure of the environmental costs internalization.
Structural effect refers to the consequences of trade liberalization on the resource use,
production processes and economic activity in general. To the extent that liberalization leads to a
better allocation of resources and efficient production and consumption, the structural effect is
positive. The persistence of inadequate mechanisms of environmental costs internalization
generates negative structural effects by perpetuating the inefficient resources allocations in favour
of the intensive natural resource and high polluting activities.
The product effect captures the beneficial or harmful nature of the product whose
international movement is encouraged by liberalization. Thus, it will be registered positive product
effects in case of enhancing trade with ecological goods, technologies and energy efficiently
machines. Negative effects appear when there is facilitated the trade with environmentally harmful
substances like: toxic wastes, hazardous chemicals, endangered species, etc.
The technological effect captures the changes of the production technologies. Negative
technological effects may occur if the polluting industries are relocated in “pollution havens” or
there are promoted for export the outdated cheap technologies which are not meeting the
environmental standards. By contrast, technological effects are considered positive if the
liberalization encourages trade in goods, services and technologies, more “friendly” to the
environment (less resources consumption, less emissions, reduced pollution per unit of product).
The positive effects will be amplified in the context of trade agreements that encourage ISO considered the main vehicle of advanced technologies and in the presence of the positive scale
effects manifested by the increased revenue and national wealth and hence the augmented demand
for “clean” technologies and stricter and more rigorous pollution standards and environmental
legislation.
The second class defined by OECD takes into account the regulatory effects and it concerns to
the consequences of trade reforms and agreements on the national measures, standards, policies and
environmental regulations. These effects can be negative when the harmonization of national
regulations with the trade agreements neutralizes the ability of governments to adopt appropriate
environmental standards and policies in relation to their levels of environmental risks and their

when the trade agreements create a favourable framework for cooperation concerning the necessary
institutional reforms for increasing the environmental standards.
In conclusion it can be said that, by itself, trade liberalization cannot be considered good or
bad for the environment. The generalization in positive or negative terms can lead to erroneous
conclusions. For example, in terms of negative effects could be argued the false idea that autarkic
countries would have the cleanest environments. In fact, the nature of the net effect of trade
liberalization on the environment depends of the compatibility between the openness of trade
policies with environmental policies, in sense of making their goals compatible, even
complementary and mutually supportive.
Trade and environment has emerged as a distinct subject in the economic analysis, especially
with the second sense of the correlation. It aims not the direct environmental impact on international
trade, but especially the effects of environmental regulations and policies on the trade between
countries.
Undoubtedly, as any economic activity the international trade is conditioned by the
environment in multiple aspects: the “endowment with factors” specific to each country based on
the geographical position; climate changes generating calamities (floods, landslides, etc.) or global
warming which may change the structure of comparative advantages in trade with bio-food etc.;
might be changed even the supply chains, transportation, distribution in international trade with
certain products or, during the extreme events (such as hurricanes), temporarily stop the ports and
routes activities or can cause infrastructural damages, all reflected in cost increases.
If the overall impact of the environment on trade is easier to elucidate theoretically, the
environmental regulations and policies effects on the trade, are more controversial, they are
approached from the perspective of a wide range of interest groups. Even when standards and
regulations are honestly motivated by the pollution control requirements and the environmental
protection, the companies’ compliance costs become higher, so they might register relative
disadvantages compared to competitors. The disputes are fuelled by the suspicion that the promoters
of environmental regulations and standards actually use them as disguised barriers to imports. In
this sense, developed countries are accused of promoting “green protectionism” established by strict
environmental rules and standards what especially less developed countries do not qualify for. In
turn, developing economies are suspected of a so-called “eco-dumping” resulted from their
engagement in a real race for lax environmental regulations, able to attract foreign investors to
boost their production and exports (Siebert, 1996, p. 188).

policies on the product life cycle when targeting certain characteristics of the goods or
manufacturing technology, the effects of ISO 14000 registration enforcement and compliance on
the small and medium size companies which the cost increases can be so high as to no longer afford
the output on external markets.
As a result we mention that the international trade and environment is a two-ways, multidimensional and often conflicting relation. Approached from the perspective of different ideologies
and especially from the standpoint of a wide range of conflicting interests, international trade –
environment correlation resulted rather in a set of multiple dilemmas than a single problem solved
by an economic general model.
2.

RECONCILIATION

BETWEEN

INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

AND

ENVIRONMENT - CONCERN OF GATT / WTO
The GATT / WTO system was created to provide to its members appropriate multilateral
framework for all aspects of trade negotiations concerning the regulation, promotion, development
and liberalization of international trade. In this regard, the aspects often included on the negotiation
agenda are those relating to avoid or eliminate conflicting relationship between trade and
environment.
The conflicts arise when manufacturing processes, regulations concerning the consumption of
certain natural resources, trade in products or waste are generating negative environmental
externalities for other states, which can cause loss of wealth. To the extent that these losses are not
reflected in the cost of transactions, establishment of restrictive trade measures such as:
environmental taxes, quotas, prohibitions or other regulations are perfectly justified in case of
environmental protection and human welfare. The problem is that the distinction between trade
measures aimed for real environmental objectives and the unjustified and discriminatory measures
applied for obstructing imports is quite difficult. This is, precisely, the main focus of the GATT /
WTO system concerning trade and environment.
Following the evolution of environmental concerns into the multilateral trading system, we
observe that the early GATT has not been given attention to this issue. Even the notion of
“environment” was not expressly mentioned in the legal text of GATT. Environmental concerns
arise regarding the exceptions to the fundamental principles of “most favoured nation” clause and
“national treatment” clause applied to “like products”. Given that, there are situations when the

production methods and techniques, art. XX GATT allows member countries to determine their
own level of environmental protection within its borders through the appropriate trade measures and
in justified cases may deviate from fundamental principles of GATT. Exceptions provided in art.
XX of GATT which such measures may be instituted refers to the protection of life or health of
humans, animals or plants and the conservation of exhaustible natural resources. (Stein, 2009, p.
287) Naturally, acceptance of such measures occurs “such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where
the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade” (Eckersley, 2004, p.
28).
More generally, we can say that, in fact, all GATT / WTO rules, regulations and principles are
related to environmental protection, because provide the preparation, negotiation and
implementation of trade measures for environmental purpose and in the same time aim to ensure
and achieve a balance between the member rights to adopt own trade measures for environmental
protection.
This last point is very visible in the contents of specific agreements convened during the
Tokyo Round. It is the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Agreement on Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures.
The first agreement assumes that the need of technical regulations and standards is universal
accepted. The “technical regulations” are understood as mandatory requirements for products,
related processes and production methods, and the “standards” as voluntary requirements. The
agreement recognizes and guarantees the right of each State to choose their desired level of
protection, avoiding the situations when the violation of technical regulations or adoption of
national more stringent standards would create disguised barriers to imports. Therefore the
agreement encourages the adoption and practice of international standards and harmonization of
conformity assessment procedures. To manage the achievements of this Agreement objectives,
there were established the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Dispute Settlement
Body on technical regulations and standards.
The SPM Agreement aims to respect the sovereign right of member countries to ensure the
appropriate level of health protection, but guaranteeing that this right is not arbitrarily used for
protectionist purposes. This agreement is based on principles of necessity and scientific
justification, exclusion of arbitrary discrimination, harmonization, equivalence and adequate level

489).
More prominent appear the concerns regarding the trade and environment relations in the
WTO frame. From the content of the Agreement Preamble establishing the WTO, sustainable
development, environmental protection and conservation are integrated into the multilateral trading
system and have been adopted as fundamental objectives of the new organization which has
substituted the GATT secretariat.
Subsequently, through the Development Agenda, in the new round of negotiations, was
requested to be addressed and evaluated the relationship between the GATT / WTO norms which
were already established and the specific trade obligations set out in the multilateral environmental
agreements (MEAs).
Currently, the trade and environment issues are handled by the WTO Committee on Trade and
Environment. The roles and issues on the agenda of this committee give us a fairly and complete
picture of the broad spectrum of environmental concerns in the GATT/WTO system.
According to the decision establishing the Committee on Trade and Environment, it has two
main missions:
-To identify, define and evaluate the relationship between trade and environmental measures
for supporting sustainable development; and
-To do recommendations for improving the provisions of the multilateral trading system
concerning: strengthening the positive interaction between trade and environmental measures, with
special attention to the needs of developing countries, particularly the least developed countries;
avoiding the protectionism and compliance with multilateral discipline, so as to ensure
responsiveness of the multilateral system to environmental objectives and supervision of trade
measures used for environmental purposes.
These tasks are detailed in the ten articles of the Committee Agenda reflecting the priority of
environmental objectives and the focus on the relationship between trade rules on the one hand and
on the other hand: general environmental policies with trade effects, trade measures used for
environmental purposes such as environmental taxes, environmental requirements for products,
including packaging, labelling, standards and regulations for recycling. Other problems included on
Committee Agenda refer to the transparency of trade measures for environmental and
environmental policies, the environmental measures potential to function as barriers for developing
country exports; the issues concerning the exports of prohibited goods on the internal markets; the
specific environmental requirements of trade in services and transactions covered by the TRIPS

the regulation of disputes etc..
Given the complex issues covered and the divergence of interests between the member
countries, although the environmental concerns in the multilateral trading system have intensified,
progresses towards reconciliation between trade and the environment are still slow. But GATT /
WTO system remains the mainstay and also the most appropriate framework for the design,
negotiation, adopting and monitoring the commercial and environmental disciplines for promotion
of sustainable development.
3.

COMMERCIAL

ASPECTS

OF

MULTILATERAL

ENVIRONMENTAL

AGREEMENTS (MEAS)
In the new context of globalization increased international trade occurs concomitantly with
increased threats from global warming, ozone depletion, persistent organic substances pollution
amplification and biodiversity degradation. In this context, and given cross-border trade flows and
environmental issues, international cooperation, reflected in the absence of a World Environment
Organization, mainly in Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) appears as the best
recommended way to avoid collisions between international trade and environment.
MEAs are agreements between States which establish principles, rights and obligations
undertaking by parties to respect the environmental purposes. Currently are operating over 300
MEAs, whose content aims to regulate and prevent the environmental challenges through a variety
of specific tools (legal, economic, technical, and commercial, etc.).About 30 of these are focused on
the use of environmental trade measures. The most representative are presented briefly below:
-Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES)signed in 1973, Romania joined in 1993, provides the framework for conservation of
species traded on the international market, but outside of commercial regulations could become
endangered. According to this convention, trade management of such species is based on biological
information and monitoring how the various types of trade regulations can affect these species.
Thus, transactions with covered species must be authorized by limited license granted allowances
which determine the maximum number of patterns that can be traded.
-Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (1985) and Montreal Protocol
(1987), which Romania joined in 1993 to. Convention is a framework document which doesn’t
intend to control the ozone depletion, but rather to establish the procedure rules for future protocols.

the Ozone Layer. Protocol prohibits the trade with products and substances that deplete the ozone
layer, whose applications are managed through a licensing system. Protocol insists more on the
obtained results and as tools recommends combining trade measures with instruments which control
domestic production and consumption, leaving to the states free choice of measures such as: taxes
on substances that deplete the ozone, incentives taxes to substitute these substances, production
quotas, quotas or import/export bans, technical product standards, labelling rules, etc. The Montreal
Protocol is considered by the OECD as the first agreement using trade measures as part of an
integrated package of world politics, aimed addressing a truly global problem (OECD, 1999, p.63).
- Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
their Disposal adopted in 1989(Romania joined in 1991) is the only international institution dealing
with this distinct class of products, which is not covered by the WTO documents (Brack and Gray,
2003, p.21.). Convention aims to protect the people and the environment against adverse effects of
production, distribution and transportation of hazardous waste. Trade measures proposed for
controlling trade in hazardous waste is based on information and prior consent. This means that a
signatory country has the right to ban the entry or disposal of hazardous waste on its territory. But if
it expresses written consent for importing or receiving such wastes and the agreement is signed by
the transit countries, such delivery between the two signatory countries can take place. Concerning
the non-signatory countries, trade with such products is prohibited in the absence of separate
agreements with them. Experts consider that Convention has legitimized and encouraged
international trade and less contributed to combat and reduce the wastes.
-Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (1992) (Romania joined in 1994) aims to record
the ecological diversity. It also authorizes special trade measures in this regard, but seeks to regulate
the issues with large commercial impact such as: resource access regime, the prevention of biopiracy and the division of profits, agricultural biodiversity, exotic species regulations, transfer of
knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous communities on local species, etc. Of great
importance is the Cartagena Protocol (2000, Romania 2003) on Biosafety, signed under this
Convention auspices. The Protocol is the first international treaty that aims to regulate
transboundary movements of genetically modified organisms. Mainly, it aims to ensure the
possibility of importers to assess the environmental risks of genetically modified organisms before
performing the operation and insists that Biosafety regulations should be applied in conformity with
WTO rules so as not turning into trade barriers to imports.

stabilize the greenhouse gases concentrations in atmosphere at a level that would prevent harmful
anthropogenic interferences in the climate system. Under the auspices of this Convention was
drafted in 1997 and scheduled to take effect in 2005 Kyoto Protocol aimed to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and especially carbon dioxide emissions reduction. Proposed measures for combating
climate changes are not purely commercial, but have large trade implications. The most frequently
recommended for achieving the Kyoto Protocol goals are the carbon taxes, plus internal policies
tools as subsidies for modernization of industrial reactors for the production of renewable energy
through more efficient and cleaner technologies. But beyond climate change mitigation measures
such taxation and subsidization have uneven repercussions on the international competitiveness.
Hence, the major tensions and conflicts may arise between the WTO norms and the Protocol
targets. This protocol has significant implications for the international trade with energy-intensive
facilities and equipment, fossil fuels and energy efficiently services.
-Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides (1998) (Romania joined in 2003) aims to regulate the international
movement of these products. Exports and imports of chemicals and pesticides are not prohibited,
but require the establishment and enforcement of some procedures preliminary agreed by the
importing country. Under this procedure mainly exporters are required to provide, including
labelling requirements, all information about the risks for the human health and the environment
and the compliance with the relevant international standards. When partner decides to establish
restrictions or prohibitions on imports, under this Convention, these should be applied to all external
suppliers of any third country and domestic producers.
-Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (2004) aims to regulate the
international movement of certain hazardous substances to hormonal functions of human and
animal health. Given the high rate of bio-accumulation, the length of persistence in time and their
great mobility and harmless, the Convention recommends to restrict and even eliminate the possible
use of such toxic substances even in small doses.
Beyond that each agreement is focused on specific areas and issues, MEAs have some
common characteristics. Thus, in general MEAs are widely agreed and supported by the
international community because: they are the results of transparent and wide - broad negotiations,
are substantiated by large-scale scientific research and recognize the special position of developing
countries, which may have limited capacity to participate in solving environmental problems. To
the extent that expressly provide environmental trade measures their purpose is: to provide adequate

international trade and unsustainable exploitation of natural resources; to discourage harmful
methods and processes of goods production and services traded on international markets; to prevent
or limit the entry of harmful substances in countries and create market opportunities and incentives
for clean use of goods.
Environmental trade measures are the only tools provided by MEA. They may be
accompanied or replaced by numerous other instruments, measures and policies that may have
impact on international trade. In this regard might be mentioned: financial assistance for industries,
including the purchase of environmental technologies; reporting obligation to monitor trade flows;
labelling rules; providing information including the relationship with the environment; rules for
notification; consent and movement-based permits; licenses; bilateral or general export or import
prohibitions etc.
The most important is whatever their nature, all the measures provided by MEAs that impact
the trade should be actually set to achieve environmental benefits and promote not disguised
protectionism.
4.

LIBERALIZATION

OF

INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

WITH

ORGANIC

PRODUCTS
Among the new issues included on WTO negotiations agenda is liberalization of international
trade with organic products. Reiterating the commitment of Member States for sustainable
development, the Doha Declaration (2001) expressly requests to reduce or eliminate tariffs and nontariff impediments to trade with organic products.
In WTO negotiations frame the environmental goods considered are divided into two classes:
A and B.
A class of “green traditional products” includes industrial goods used to provide
environmental services which address pollution and waste affecting water, soil and air (examples:
filters, pumps, reservoirs and containers, soft water purification chemicals, equipment sorting,
recycling, metering and environmental monitoring, etc.).
Class B “preferred organic products” includes industrial and consumer goods in their features
environmentally friendly (examples: organic products, biodegradable fibres, natural dyes, organic
soaps without phosphates, renewable energy equipment, etc.) and are “preferable” to replace goods
with similar uses, but harmful to the environment at the time of production, use and final disposal.

activities producing goods that can measure, prevent, limit, reduce or correct environmental damage
affecting water, air and soil or problems related to waste, noise and eco-systems. Identified as an
emerging sector, the eco-industry is rising, becoming increasingly complex and includes within its
production technologies, equipment and environmental services: wastewater treatment, waste
management and recycling; air pollution control; noise reduction; monitoring instruments for
natural resource conservation, etc..
Despite the rise of trade with environmental goods production is hampered by numerous tariff
and non-tariff barriers. Such barriers prevent the entrance on developed country markets of goods
from developing countries for which the exports of organic products is of great interest, and also the
OECD supplies of equipment and technologies for low-income countries.
In terms of tariff barriers, it is considered that the rates for imports of environmental products
is 0-3% for OECD countries, while for many low-income countries are about 8-9% and higher to
about 20% for some emerging economies (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, India, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand). The big difference between the average and maximum tariff agreed at the WTO
negotiations and the ease with which countries can drag to the maximum, give rise to uncertainty
for exporters.
To this are added the various non-tariff instruments affecting imports of environmental
products among the most frequently used ones are: standards, certifications and environmental
subsidies, quotas and other quantitative restrictions, marketing practice, distribution, logistics and
other various regulations. The specialists emphasize the technical standards and certification
procedures are the most discriminating tools against the entrance of environmental products on
developed country markets from developing countries (Khatun, 2004, p. 13). Under these
conditions the liberalization of environmental goods trade presents great interest and has wide
support, being motivated both commercially and environmentally.
In terms of trade liberalization means: new opportunities for export of environmental products
from developing countries to developed ones; opening of developing country markets for the knowhow, equipment and technologies supplied by OECD countries; competitiveness increase, the prices
diminution, supply augmentation and growth of quality of environmental products, etc.
Under this aspect, eco liberalization allows better access to green technologies, increase of
international environmental standards, pollution prevention and control according to national and
international regulations and compliance with sustainable development objectives.

products depends of internal reforms and the degree of compatibility between open markets and
national development objectives.
5. INTERNATIONAL TRADE – ENVIRONMENT RELATION IN THE CONTEXT
OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ROMANIA
In Romania, a proper environmental policy (defined as “an integrated system of
environmental priorities and objectives, methods and tools directed to ensure the sustainable use of
natural resources and prevent degradation of environment”(European Communities, 2009, p.12) or
“a set of coherent measures and means seeking to preserve the support capacity of natural
systems”(Negrei, 1999, p. 14) can be considered since 1990s in the context of the adoption of
sustainable development as a priority when “environmental policy has become an overall policy,
recognizing its importance for the harmonious development of society.” (Rojanschi et al., 2003, p.
47) Naturally, sustainable development involves linking the international trade as one of the main
pillars of economic growth with environmental protection.
The awareness of international trade and environment relationship and the awareness of
policies complementarities concerning these two areas appear from the international position taken
by Romania, also in numerous trade policy measures implemented over the years that actually are
environmentally friendly. Romania's international position is reflected by the participation at
conventions, agreements and organizations responsible for the regulations and the control of
international trade and environmental issues.
Thus, Romania signed over 250 bilateral and multilateral environmental agreements and
conventions concerning the air quality, nature protection, water quality, waste management,
chemicals and reduction of the nuclear accidents effects which are implemented through national
legislation always completed and updated.
Among these, particularly important are the Basel Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. In
1991 Romania signed the Basel Convention, pledging not to export or import pollutants waste that
could harm the environment. In 2001, Romania has developed the National Waste Management
Strategy aimed to implement an integrated management system waste, economically efficient and
environmentally friendly.
After joining the EU from July 15, 2007, Romanian practice adopted the European Regulation
No 1013/2006 concerning the waste shipments. According to Government Decision (GD)

control of import, export and transit of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes.
Romania, also, signed the Kyoto Protocol (1997) on combating global warming, the 8%
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions between 2008-2012 requirements were more than satisfied,
the Romanian industrial production decrease allowed a reduction of 46%. Unfortunately, the
opportunity of green certificates trading abroad was not sufficiently well managed and harnessed,
loosing substantial revenues needed to complete the environmental protection funds. Romania’s
concerns about the harmonization of relations between trade and the environment are the most
eloquent reflected from the position adopted by the GATT / WTO. Within this multilateral
institutional system, Romania has steadily pronounced even before 1995 for trade liberalization and
simultaneous for addressing the environmental global problems through the multilateral
environmental agreements path that should function in character and complementary to the
multilateral trading system rules.
According to this position, after WTO creation, Romania argued that the trade and
environment agenda negotiations should include the following objectives: clarification in a
multilateral framework of the relationship between MEAs and WTO rules, members' rights to
invoke the precautionary principle within the environmental issues, avoiding the use of
discriminatory practices and develop new multilateral disciplines regarding the eco-labelling. To
achieve these goals, along with signing the Final Act at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994, Romania
agreed, also, the formation of the WTO Committee on trade and environment.
The multitude of trade policy measures interfering with environmental policy aim issues such
as:
- Protection of animal health, prevention of disease transmissions from animals to humans,
food safety;
- Compliance with the quarantine rules and phytosanitary certificates required for import and
export of the plants and vegetable products;
- Monitoring the compliance with environmental protection measures involving the
submission to customs authority along with the customs import or export declarations, the
environmental permits issued by the competent environmental protection authorities;
- Use restriction or ban of hazardous chemicals in accordance with international conventions
to which Romania is a member party;
- Quality control of medicines and medical devices, import/export of which is performed only
by special permits issued by the health authorities;

undergone the cleansing and disinfection.
After accession, Romania took over the EU's common policies, including trade and
environmental policy. According to these, the current objectives of Romania in the field of
environment are: protection and improvement of the environment, protection of public health,
rational and prudent use of natural resources and promoting measures at international level to tackle
and solve the regional and global environmental problems. As instruments, most commonly used
are: legislation, particularly environmental quality directives (pollution levels, etc.), products norms
(concentration limits, emission, etc.) environmental programs and financial aid programs.
Note that all of these tools may be trade barriers to market access, most frequently identified
are: environmental standards and regulations, labelling and eco-labelling and a number of economic
instruments.
In terms of standardization, Romania has a relatively long experience, started since joining in
1928 as a member of the International Electrotechnical Commission. Since 1998, Romania is
represented in international standardization process by the Romania Standards Association. This is
a private association of public interest whose duties are to coordinate the national standardization
activities and exchange information with exterior in this area.
By their nature there are two types of standards: product standards, which refer to the
characteristics of goods (performance requirements, minimum nutrient content, maximum toxicity
of exhaust emissions, etc.) and process standards concerning the conditions of manufacture.
In Romanian practice can be found following national standards: Romanian original standards
with SR or STAT indication; Romanian standards that have adopted a European standard: SR EN or
SR EN ISO; Romanian standards that have adopted an international standard: SR ISO; Romanian
standards that have adopted an amendment and Romanian standards that have adopted an errata.
According to standardization methodology, original Romanian standards and those which
have adopted an international standard should be examined every 5 years after publication,
reviewing, modification or reconfirmation and original national standards what become in conflict
with the adopted European standards should be cancelled.
Note that the updating and alignment of Romanian legislation and standards to those
European and international is a condition of export promotion. In this respect, low no. 608/2001 on
the conformity assessment of products expressly provides in Article 7 that “technical regulations
shall refer to harmonized European standards adopted nationally conferring presumption of
conformity with the essential requirements.” As well are the laws no. 312/2003, 348/2003, and

quality standards.
Concerning labelling, this can be mandatory or voluntary and it provides information to users
or consumers about the positive impact (biodegradability, etc.) or negative (toxicity, flammability,
etc.) of the product or manufacturing process on the environment and health. In some cases it can
provide information about the geographic indicators or country of origin. The content of the
messages transmitted by the labels can have an important impact on the dynamics of trading flows.
As awareness of environmental deterioration, a growing share on international market tends to have
the environmentally friendly products. They are identified by the beneficiary through the eco-label.
Eco-label is a voluntary label for products with minimal impact on human health and environment.
The EU Eco-label - “European Flower” was introduced in 1992 by the European Commission.
Currently, the award procedure is governed by the Regulation no. 1980/2000 of the European
Parliament and Council. European Eco-label is meant to establish a unique certification scheme at
the Community level for green and environmentally friendly products.
Romanian legislation transposed the provisions of European Regulation No. 1980/2000
through the GD. 189/2002, repealed by GD. 236/2007 on a revised system for granting the
Community eco-label. In compliance with European and international legislation for
implementation of Community Eco-label scheme, in Romania was created the National
Commission for eco-label. It functions as an advisory body with an active decisional role regarding
the eco-labels.
The main categories of products concerned to be labelled are: household appliances
(refrigerators, wash machine, vacuums, TVs, etc.), laptops, detergents, soil improvers, paints and
varnishes for interior, heat pumps, accommodations for tourists, camping services etc.
Although, in principle the Eco-label scheme is open to all products and services, some
categories are expressly excluded. These are: toxic substances obtained through harmful means for
humans or the environment, food, beverages, pharmaceutical and medical devices. The range of
economic instruments which seek to influence the behaviour of economic agents by internalizing
the environmental costs is varied (see Figure 1). In Romania the highest use have the fiscal tools,
such as environmental taxes. In terms of resource allocation, the financial taxes benefits as
described by specialists (Vuţă, 2004, p. 67) are twofold: concerning the economic optimum, the
financial charge makes that for every public rendered service to match a price; from environmental
point of view, the tax exerts an incentive effect which diminish the volume of emissions and waste.

considerations, the real motive is more likely financial-budgetary. Paradoxically, among the 15
taxes on activities with potential impact on the environment, only (first registration tax, tax for
pollutants emissions into the atmosphere, packaging tax and the tax for tires) brought significant
revenue to the Environmental Fund.
The modest contributions for supplying this fund are not related to the lack of potential of
charged fields, but especially to the methodological difficulties of tax implementation and income
collection.
So far, the most important contribution to the Environmental Fund revenues was carried by
the first registration tax, recently became “environmental stamp”. The obtained Fund administration
incomes may be used only to finance the Program for stimulating the national car park renewal and
the projects regarding the environmental protection.
Figure 1 - Classification of Economic Instruments

Source: Panayotou, Th., (1994) Economic instruments for environmental management and sustainable development, Environmental
Economics Series Paper No. 16, UNEP, p. 9.

significant effects of discrimination between producers and consumers of gasoline and diesel cars
and electric cars or hybrids, among buyers who purchase new cars and old cars, also by the
assessment methodology is infringed the “polluter pays” principle, the fiscal burden being borne by
the final consumers, regardless of the car usability.
Other fiscal instruments with significant commercial and ecological effects are the tax: on
packaging, on the hazardous substances, on tires and on the oils wastes introduced by the low no.
167/2010.
CONCLUSIONS
From the above it follows that in the context of efforts to promote sustainable development, it
was registered a significant progress towards harmonization of international trade relations and the
environment. However there are still some inconsistencies and legal and institutional failures
related largely to the prevalence of the importance of objectives: the economic growth or the
environmental protection, specifically to developing countries; and more recently related to the
phenomena of economic and financial crises. It is expected that Romania will promote the
strengthening and simultaneous optimization of trade and environmental policies for the future
sustainable development.

REFERENCES
Barbier, E. (1994)Natural capital and the economics of environment and de-velopment; in: A.
Jansson, M. Hammer, C. Folke and R. Costanza (eds.): Invest-ing in natural capital: the
ecological economics approach to sustainability, Washington D.C.: Island Press, pp. 291-322.
Beckerman, W. (1992) Economic Growth and the Environment: Whose Growth? Whose
Environment?, World Development, Issue 20, pp. 481–96.
Beghin, J. (2000) Environment and Trade in Developing Economies: A Primer for the World Bank's
Global Economic Prospects 2000, Working Paper 00-WP 247, World Bank.
Brack, D. (2000) Trade and environment after Seattle, RIIA Briefing Paper, New Series No. 13.

IISD, p. 21.
Copeland, B., Talyor, S. (1994) North-South Trade and the Environment, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Volume 109, pp. 755-787.
Eckersley R. (2004) The Big Chill: The WTO and Multilateral Environmental Agreements, Global
Environmental Politics, Volume 4, Issue 2, p. 28.
European Communities (2009) The environmental goods and services sector, Methodologies and
Working papers, Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
Georgescu Roegen, N. (1996) Legea entropiei şi procesul economic, Bucharest: Publishing House
Expert.
Khatun, F. (2004) Environmental Debates in the WTO: Defining Bangladesh’s Interests, Paper No.
35, CPD Occasional Paper Series, Dhaka.
Mahe, L.P. (1997) Environment and quality standards in the WTO: New protectionism in
agricultural trade? An European perspective, European Review of Agricultural Economics,
no. 24, p. 489.
Markandaya, A., Pearce, D. (1988) Natural environments and the social rate of discount, Project
Appraisal, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 2– 12.
Negrei C. (1999) Instrumente si metode în managementul mediului, Editura Economica, Bucuresti.
Neumayer, E. (1998) Is Economic Growth the Environment’s Best Friend?, Journal of
Environmental Law and Policy2/98, pp. 161-176.
OECD (1994) Methodologies for Environment and trade Reviews, OCDE/GD(94)103, Paris.
OECD (1999) Multilateral Environmental Agreements: Synthesis Report of Three Cases Studies.
Paris: Joint Working Party on Trade and Environment, COM/ENV/TD (98)127, p. 63.
OECD (2000) Politique environnementale et efficacité économique, Paris.
Panayotou, Th., (1994) Economic instruments for environmental management and sustainable
development, Environmental Economics Series Paper No. 16, UNEP.
Platon, V. (1997) Protecţia mediului şi dezvoltarea economică: Instituţii şi mecanisme în perioada
de tranziţie, Ed. Didactică și Pedagogică, Bucharest.
Rojanschi, V., Bran. F., Diaconu, S., Grigore, F. (2003) Abordări economice în protecţia
mediului,Publishing House ASE, Bucharest.
Siebert, H. (1996)Trade Policy and Environmental Protection, Bleckwell Publishes Ltd, pp. 183194.
Sprenger, R. (1997) Globalization, Employment and Environment, OECD Paris, p. 29.

Trade Organization, American Journal of Economics and Business Administration, Vol. 1,
Issue 4, p. 287.
Vuţă, M. (2004) Politici si strategii financiare de protectia mediului, Publishing House ASE,
Bucharest.

JEL Classification: F18; Q34; Q56; Q57.

INTRODUCTION
Complex relationships between international trade and the environment is one of the most
significant moments of the economic development – environment correlation. The importance of
this sequence has grew in the recent decades due to increasing pressures of the economic
development on the environment and the maximizing role of international trade as an engine of
and environmental policies on the trade between countries.
With reference to the first side of correlation, it specifies that international trade is not a direct
source of environmental degradation or improvement. The potential positive or negative impact is
indirect, mediated by its effects on production and consumption. Consumption and production as
main components of economic activity, alongside with rigor and suitability of environmental policy,
are part of the fundamental determinants which influence the environmental improvement or
degradation.
From the international trade perspective, the dimension of environmental impact depends of
the amount and frequency of transactions significant conditioned by the degree of trade
liberalization. Consequently, the theoretical analysis was focused on the impact of international
trade liberalization on the environment. Outstanding contributions to this subject have been made
by a number of neoclassical theorists and the so-called “ecological economists”(like Costanza,
Daly, Hall, Jansson, Hannon, Odum, Pimentl, and Martinez-Alie) and the promoters of sustainable
development (“environmental economists”, like Hanley, Shogren, White, Wallace, Oates, and
Stavins).
The negative environmental impact of liberalization is conveyed in literature especially by the
environmentalists. They believe that at least on the short term, trade liberalization could trigger a
vicious circle of effects which involve environmental degradation. Initiation and propagation of
these effects are motivated by different situations, such as: amplification of international
specialization in intensive polluting products which are using exhaustible natural resources (mining,
forestry, fisheries, etc.); facilitation of trade with hazardous substances and waste; extension of
transport distances with carbon growth effects; stimulation for firms relocation in countries with
permissive environmental standards; deepening the nationally and internationally income gaps; the
orientation of “disadvantaged” towards consumption of natural resources whose amplification
adversely affects the environment etc.
Such negative effects are mediated by the economic growth processes and favoured by the
underestimation of natural resources and generally lack of adequate environmental policies capable
to ensuring the internalization of environmental costs.
But most of these debates participants contest the environmentalists’ points of view,
describing the environmental impact of international trade as positive. Especially, the liberalization
adepts (Beckerman, 1992; Barbier, 1994; Markandaya, 1988; Copeland and Talyor, 1994) believe
that trade and investment barriers reduction generates wealth, including the movement of

the welfare is likely to increase living standards, the demand for a cleaner environment and finally
the environmental protection. In general, the positive environmental impact of international trade
liberalization is supported by numerous arguments relating to such issues:
- Efficient allocation of the environmental resources that determines the improve of
production structure for goods less intensive in natural resources, based on lower energy
consumption and lower degree of pollution;
- Facilitation of international transfer of environmental and less polluting technologies. Trade
openness facilitates such the abandonment of old, inefficient and polluting (the former communist
countries) power plants in favour of the modern one with combined cycle which encourages the use
of alternative sources: wind, solar and tidal. Including the multinational companies, often
considered criminals in terms of exploitation of developing countries resources, are interested and
can afford new, efficient and less polluting technologies. As a result there is an intensive
modernization and revitalization of polluting sectors previously protected;
-Convergence of environmental standards of products and processes to the highest levels in
the world. Thus, more stringent environmental policies from developed countries may be imported
into countries with lax standards voluntarily in the context of enhancing mutual relations or
involuntarily by treating with trade sanctions, or following the adoption of new regulations aimed
for harmonizing the environmental standards;
- Encouraging the development of organic products markets;
- Elimination of subsidies and distorted prices in closed economies including the alignment of
world prices;
- Encouragement of international cooperation regarding the environmental protection, etc.
As a synthesis of the arguments presented above, in the literature was detailed a broad
typology of environmental effects of trade liberalization. The most representative is the approach
proposed by the OECD (OECD, 2000 and Sprenger, 1997, p. 29). According to this, reported to
international trade in goods, by the nature and scope of their manifestation can be distinguished two
main classes of effects: those that define the economic impact and those that target the impact of
trade liberalization in the legal framework.
In the first class are framed: the scale effect, the structural effect, the effect of product and
technological effect.
The scale effect as a propagation mechanism takes place at the macro-economic level: trade
liberalization generates an enhanced role of trade that involves increased economic activity, and

use of environmental resources, possibly even an environmental degradation. The scale effect is
positive if the growth process creates an increasing demand for environmental improvement and the
financial gains are allocated for this purpose. Conversely, scale effects are negative in the absence
of a proper environmental management and conditions an excessive use of natural resources,
increasing pollution and failure of the environmental costs internalization.
Structural effect refers to the consequences of trade liberalization on the resource use,
production processes and economic activity in general. To the extent that liberalization leads to a
better allocation of resources and efficient production and consumption, the structural effect is
positive. The persistence of inadequate mechanisms of environmental costs internalization
generates negative structural effects by perpetuating the inefficient resources allocations in favour
of the intensive natural resource and high polluting activities.
The product effect captures the beneficial or harmful nature of the product whose
international movement is encouraged by liberalization. Thus, it will be registered positive product
effects in case of enhancing trade with ecological goods, technologies and energy efficiently
machines. Negative effects appear when there is facilitated the trade with environmentally harmful
substances like: toxic wastes, hazardous chemicals, endangered species, etc.
The technological effect captures the changes of the production technologies. Negative
technological effects may occur if the polluting industries are relocated in “pollution havens” or
there are promoted for export the outdated cheap technologies which are not meeting the
environmental standards. By contrast, technological effects are considered positive if the
liberalization encourages trade in goods, services and technologies, more “friendly” to the
environment (less resources consumption, less emissions, reduced pollution per unit of product).
The positive effects will be amplified in the context of trade agreements that encourage ISO considered the main vehicle of advanced technologies and in the presence of the positive scale
effects manifested by the increased revenue and national wealth and hence the augmented demand
for “clean” technologies and stricter and more rigorous pollution standards and environmental
legislation.
The second class defined by OECD takes into account the regulatory effects and it concerns to
the consequences of trade reforms and agreements on the national measures, standards, policies and
environmental regulations. These effects can be negative when the harmonization of national
regulations with the trade agreements neutralizes the ability of governments to adopt appropriate
environmental standards and policies in relation to their levels of environmental risks and their

when the trade agreements create a favourable framework for cooperation concerning the necessary
institutional reforms for increasing the environmental standards.
In conclusion it can be said that, by itself, trade liberalization cannot be considered good or
bad for the environment. The generalization in positive or negative terms can lead to erroneous
conclusions. For example, in terms of negative effects could be argued the false idea that autarkic
countries would have the cleanest environments. In fact, the nature of the net effect of trade
liberalization on the environment depends of the compatibility between the openness of trade
policies with environmental policies, in sense of making their goals compatible, even
complementary and mutually supportive.
Trade and environment has emerged as a distinct subject in the economic analysis, especially
with the second sense of the correlation. It aims not the direct environmental impact on international
trade, but especially the effects of environmental regulations and policies on the trade between
countries.
Undoubtedly, as any economic activity the international trade is conditioned by the
environment in multiple aspects: the “endowment with factors” specific to each country based on
the geographical position; climate changes generating calamities (floods, landslides, etc.) or global
warming which may change the structure of comparative advantages in trade with bio-food etc.;
might be changed even the supply chains, transportation, distribution in international trade with
certain products or, during the extreme events (such as hurricanes), temporarily stop the ports and
routes activities or can cause infrastructural damages, all reflected in cost increases.
If the overall impact of the environment on trade is easier to elucidate theoretically, the
environmental regulations and policies effects on the trade, are more controversial, they are
approached from the perspective of a wide range of interest groups. Even when standards and
regulations are honestly motivated by the pollution control requirements and the environmental
protection, the companies’ compliance costs become higher, so they might register relative
disadvantages compared to competitors. The disputes are fuelled by the suspicion that the promoters
of environmental regulations and standards actually use them as disguised barriers to imports. In
this sense, developed countries are accused of promoting “green protectionism” established by strict
environmental rules and standards what especially less developed countries do not qualify for. In
turn, developing economies are suspected of a so-called “eco-dumping” resulted from their
engagement in a real race for lax environmental regulations, able to attract foreign investors to
boost their production and exports (Siebert, 1996, p. 188).

policies on the product life cycle when targeting certain characteristics of the goods or
manufacturing technology, the effects of ISO 14000 registration enforcement and compliance on
the small and medium size companies which the cost increases can be so high as to no longer afford
the output on external markets.
As a result we mention that the international trade and environment is a two-ways, multidimensional and often conflicting relation. Approached from the perspective of different ideologies
and especially from the standpoint of a wide range of conflicting interests, international trade –
environment correlation resulted rather in a set of multiple dilemmas than a single problem solved
by an economic general model.
2.

RECONCILIATION

BETWEEN

INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

AND

ENVIRONMENT - CONCERN OF GATT / WTO
The GATT / WTO system was created to provide to its members appropriate multilateral
framework for all aspects of trade negotiations concerning the regulation, promotion, development
and liberalization of international trade. In this regard, the aspects often included on the negotiation
agenda are those relating to avoid or eliminate conflicting relationship between trade and
environment.
The conflicts arise when manufacturing processes, regulations concerning the consumption of
certain natural resources, trade in products or waste are generating negative environmental
externalities for other states, which can cause loss of wealth. To the extent that these losses are not
reflected in the cost of transactions, establishment of restrictive trade measures such as:
environmental taxes, quotas, prohibitions or other regulations are perfectly justified in case of
environmental protection and human welfare. The problem is that the distinction between trade
measures aimed for real environmental objectives and the unjustified and discriminatory measures
applied for obstructing imports is quite difficult. This is, precisely, the main focus of the GATT /
WTO system concerning trade and environment.
Following the evolution of environmental concerns into the multilateral trading system, we
observe that the early GATT has not been given attention to this issue. Even the notion of
“environment” was not expressly mentioned in the legal text of GATT. Environmental concerns
arise regarding the exceptions to the fundamental principles of “most favoured nation” clause and
“national treatment” clause applied to “like products”. Given that, there are situations when the

production methods and techniques, art. XX GATT allows member countries to determine their
own level of environmental protection within its borders through the appropriate trade measures and
in justified cases may deviate from fundamental principles of GATT. Exceptions provided in art.
XX of GATT which such measures may be instituted refers to the protection of life or health of
humans, animals or plants and the conservation of exhaustible natural resources. (Stein, 2009, p.
287) Naturally, acceptance of such measures occurs “such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where
the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade” (Eckersley, 2004, p.
28).
More generally, we can say that, in fact, all GATT / WTO rules, regulations and principles are
related to environmental protection, because provide the preparation, negotiation and
implementation of trade measures for environmental purpose and in the same time aim to ensure
and achieve a balance between the member rights to adopt own trade measures for environmental
protection.
This last point is very visible in the contents of specific agreements convened during the
Tokyo Round. It is the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Agreement on Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures.
The first agreement assumes that the need of technical regulations and standards is universal
accepted. The “technical regulations” are understood as mandatory requirements for products,
related processes and production methods, and the “standards” as voluntary requirements. The
agreement recognizes and guarantees the right of each State to choose their desired level of
protection, avoiding the situations when the violation of technical regulations or adoption of
national more stringent standards would create disguised barriers to imports. Therefore the
agreement encourages the adoption and practice of international standards and harmonization of
conformity assessment procedures. To manage the achievements of this Agreement objectives,
there were established the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Dispute Settlement
Body on technical regulations and standards.
The SPM Agreement aims to respect the sovereign right of member countries to ensure the
appropriate level of health protection, but guaranteeing that this right is not arbitrarily used for
protectionist purposes. This agreement is based on principles of necessity and scientific
justification, exclusion of arbitrary discrimination, harmonization, equivalence and adequate level

489).
More prominent appear the concerns regarding the trade and environment relations in the
WTO frame. From the content of the Agreement Preamble establishing the WTO, sustainable
development, environmental protection and conservation are integrated into the multilateral trading
system and have been adopted as fundamental objectives of the new organization which has
substituted the GATT secretariat.
Subsequently, through the Development Agenda, in the new round of negotiations, was
requested to be addressed and evaluated the relationship between the GATT / WTO norms which
were already established and the specific trade obligations set out in the multilateral environmental
agreements (MEAs).
Currently, the trade and environment issues are handled by the WTO Committee on Trade and
Environment. The roles and issues on the agenda of this committee give us a fairly and complete
picture of the broad spectrum of environmental concerns in the GATT/WTO system.
According to the decision establishing the Committee on Trade and Environment, it has two
main missions:
-To identify, define and evaluate the relationship between trade and environmental measures
for supporting sustainable development; and
-To do recommendations for improving the provisions of the multilateral trading system
concerning: strengthening the positive interaction between trade and environmental measures, with
special attention to the needs of developing countries, particularly the least developed countries;
avoiding the protectionism and compliance with multilateral discipline, so as to ensure
responsiveness of the multilateral system to environmental objectives and supervision of trade
measures used for environmental purposes.
These tasks are detailed in the ten articles of the Committee Agenda reflecting the priority of
environmental objectives and the focus on the relationship between trade rules on the one hand and
on the other hand: general environmental policies with trade effects, trade measures used for
environmental purposes such as environmental taxes, environmental requirements for products,
including packaging, labelling, standards and regulations for recycling. Other problems included on
Committee Agenda refer to the transparency of trade measures for environmental and
environmental policies, the environmental measures potential to function as barriers for developing
country exports; the issues concerning the exports of prohibited goods on the internal markets; the
specific environmental requirements of trade in services and transactions covered by the TRIPS

the regulation of disputes etc..
Given the complex issues covered and the divergence of interests between the member
countries, although the environmental concerns in the multilateral trading system have intensified,
progresses towards reconciliation between trade and the environment are still slow. But GATT /
WTO system remains the mainstay and also the most appropriate framework for the design,
negotiation, adopting and monitoring the commercial and environmental disciplines for promotion
of sustainable development.
3.

COMMERCIAL

ASPECTS

OF

MULTILATERAL

ENVIRONMENTAL

AGREEMENTS (MEAS)
In the new context of globalization increased international trade occurs concomitantly with
increased threats from global warming, ozone depletion, persistent organic substances pollution
amplification and biodiversity degradation. In this context, and given cross-border trade flows and
environmental issues, international cooperation, reflected in the absence of a World Environment
Organization, mainly in Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) appears as the best
recommended way to avoid collisions between international trade and environment.
MEAs are agreements between States which establish principles, rights and obligations
undertaking by parties to respect the environmental purposes. Currently are operating over 300
MEAs, whose content aims to regulate and prevent the environmental challenges through a variety
of specific tools (legal, economic, technical, and commercial, etc.).About 30 of these are focused on
the use of environmental trade measures. The most representative are presented briefly below:
-Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES)signed in 1973, Romania joined in 1993, provides the framework for conservation of
species traded on the international market, but outside of commercial regulations could become
endangered. According to this convention, trade management of such species is based on biological
information and monitoring how the various types of trade regulations can affect these species.
Thus, transactions with covered species must be authorized by limited license granted allowances
which determine the maximum number of patterns that can be traded.
-Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (1985) and Montreal Protocol
(1987), which Romania joined in 1993 to. Convention is a framework document which doesn’t
intend to control the ozone depletion, but rather to establish the procedure rules for future protocols.

the Ozone Layer. Protocol prohibits the trade with products and substances that deplete the ozone
layer, whose applications are managed through a licensing system. Protocol insists more on the
obtained results and as tools recommends combining trade measures with instruments which control
domestic production and consumption, leaving to the states free choice of measures such as: taxes
on substances that deplete the ozone, incentives taxes to substitute these substances, production
quotas, quotas or import/export bans, technical product standards, labelling rules, etc. The Montreal
Protocol is considered by the OECD as the first agreement using trade measures as part of an
integrated package of world politics, aimed addressing a truly global problem (OECD, 1999, p.63).
- Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
their Disposal adopted in 1989(Romania joined in 1991) is the only international institution dealing
with this distinct class of products, which is not covered by the WTO documents (Brack and Gray,
2003, p.21.). Convention aims to protect the people and the environment against adverse effects of
production, distribution and transportation of hazardous waste. Trade measures proposed for
controlling trade in hazardous waste is based on information and prior consent. This means that a
signatory country has the right to ban the entry or disposal of hazardous waste on its territory. But if
it expresses written consent for importing or receiving such wastes and the agreement is signed by
the transit countries, such delivery between the two signatory countries can take place. Concerning
the non-signatory countries, trade with such products is prohibited in the absence of separate
agreements with them. Experts consider that Convention has legitimized and encouraged
international trade and less contributed to combat and reduce the wastes.
-Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (1992) (Romania joined in 1994) aims to record
the ecological diversity. It also authorizes special trade measures in this regard, but seeks to regulate
the issues with large commercial impact such as: resource access regime, the prevention of biopiracy and the division of profits, agricultural biodiversity, exotic species regulations, transfer of
knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous communities on local species, etc. Of great
importance is the Cartagena Protocol (2000, Romania 2003) on Biosafety, signed under this
Convention auspices. The Protocol is the first international treaty that aims to regulate
transboundary movements of genetically modified organisms. Mainly, it aims to ensure the
possibility of importers to assess the environmental risks of genetically modified organisms before
performing the operation and insists that Biosafety regulations should be applied in conformity with
WTO rules so as not turning into trade barriers to imports.

stabilize the greenhouse gases concentrations in atmosphere at a level that would prevent harmful
anthropogenic interferences in the climate system. Under the auspices of this Convention was
drafted in 1997 and scheduled to take effect in 2005 Kyoto Protocol aimed to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and especially carbon dioxide emissions reduction. Proposed measures for combating
climate changes are not purely commercial, but have large trade implications. The most frequently
recommended for achieving the Kyoto Protocol goals are the carbon taxes, plus internal policies
tools as subsidies for modernization of industrial reactors for the production of renewable energy
through more efficient and cleaner technologies. But beyond climate change mitigation measures
such taxation and subsidization have uneven repercussions on the international competitiveness.
Hence, the major tensions and conflicts may arise between the WTO norms and the Protocol
targets. This protocol has significant implications for the international trade with energy-intensive
facilities and equipment, fossil fuels and energy efficiently services.
-Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides (1998) (Romania joined in 2003) aims to regulate the international
movement of these products. Exports and imports of chemicals and pesticides are not prohibited,
but require the establishment and enforcement of some procedures preliminary agreed by the
importing country. Under this procedure mainly exporters are required to provide, including
labelling requirements, all information about the risks for the human health and the environment
and the compliance with the relevant international standards. When partner decides to establish
restrictions or prohibitions on imports, under this Convention, these should be applied to all external
suppliers of any third country and domestic producers.
-Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (2004) aims to regulate the
international movement of certain hazardous substances to hormonal functions of human and
animal health. Given the high rate of bio-accumulation, the length of persistence in time and their
great mobility and harmless, the Convention recommends to restrict and even eliminate the possible
use of such toxic substances even in small doses.
Beyond that each agreement is focused on specific areas and issues, MEAs have some
common characteristics. Thus, in general MEAs are widely agreed and supported by the
international community because: they are the results of transparent and wide - broad negotiations,
are substantiated by large-scale scientific research and recognize the special position of developing
countries, which may have limited capacity to participate in solving environmental problems. To
the extent that expressly provide environmental trade measures their purpose is: to provide adequate

international trade and unsustainable exploitation of natural resources; to discourage harmful
methods and processes of goods production and services traded on international markets; to prevent
or limit the entry of harmful substances in countries and create market opportunities and incentives
for clean use of goods.
Environmental trade measures are the only tools provided by MEA. They may be
accompanied or replaced by numerous other instruments, measures and policies that may have
impact on international trade. In this regard might be mentioned: financial assistance for industries,
including the purchase of environmental technologies; reporting obligation to monitor trade flows;
labelling rules; providing information including the relationship with the environment; rules for
notification; consent and movement-based permits; licenses; bilateral or general export or import
prohibitions etc.
The most important is whatever their nature, all the measures provided by MEAs that impact
the trade should be actually set to achieve environmental benefits and promote not disguised
protectionism.
4.

LIBERALIZATION

OF

INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

WITH

ORGANIC

PRODUCTS
Among the new issues included on WTO negotiations agenda is liberalization of international
trade with organic products. Reiterating the commitment of Member States for sustainable
development, the Doha Declaration (2001) expressly requests to reduce or eliminate tariffs and nontariff impediments to trade with organic products.
In WTO negotiations frame the environmental goods considered are divided into two classes:
A and B.
A class of “green traditional products” includes industrial goods used to provide
environmental services which address pollution and waste affecting water, soil and air (examples:
filters, pumps, reservoirs and containers, soft water purification chemicals, equipment sorting,
recycling, metering and environmental monitoring, etc.).
Class B “preferred organic products” includes industrial and consumer goods in their features
environmentally friendly (examples: organic products, biodegradable fibres, natural dyes, organic
soaps without phosphates, renewable energy equipment, etc.) and are “preferable” to replace goods
with similar uses, but harmful to the environment at the time of production, use and final disposal.

activities producing goods that can measure, prevent, limit, reduce or correct environmental damage
affecting water, air and soil or problems related to waste, noise and eco-systems. Identified as an
emerging sector, the eco-industry is rising, becoming increasingly complex and includes within its
production technologies, equipment and environmental services: wastewater treatment, waste
management and recycling; air pollution control; noise reduction; monitoring instruments for
natural resource conservation, etc..
Despite the rise of trade with environmental goods production is hampered by numerous tariff
and non-tariff barriers. Such barriers prevent the entrance on developed country markets of goods
from developing countries for which the exports of organic products is of great interest, and also the
OECD supplies of equipment and technologies for low-income countries.
In terms of tariff barriers, it is considered that the rates for imports of environmental products
is 0-3% for OECD countries, while for many low-income countries are about 8-9% and higher to
about 20% for some emerging economies (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, India, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand). The big difference between the average and maximum tariff agreed at the WTO
negotiations and the ease with which countries can drag to the maximum, give rise to uncertainty
for exporters.
To this are added the various non-tariff instruments affecting imports of environmental
products among the most frequently used ones are: standards, certifications and environmental
subsidies, quotas and other quantitative restrictions, marketing practice, distribution, logistics and
other various regulations. The specialists emphasize the technical standards and certification
procedures are the most discriminating tools against the entrance of environmental products on
developed country markets from developing countries (Khatun, 2004, p. 13). Under these
conditions the liberalization of environmental goods trade presents great interest and has wide
support, being motivated both commercially and environmentally.
In terms of trade liberalization means: new opportunities for export of environmental products
from developing countries to developed ones; opening of developing country markets for the knowhow, equipment and technologies supplied by OECD countries; competitiveness increase, the prices
diminution, supply augmentation and growth of quality of environmental products, etc.
Under this aspect, eco liberalization allows better access to green technologies, increase of
international environmental standards, pollution prevention and control according to national and
international regulations and compliance with sustainable development objectives.

products depends of internal reforms and the degree of compatibility between open markets and
national development objectives.
5. INTERNATIONAL TRADE – ENVIRONMENT RELATION IN THE CONTEXT
OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ROMANIA
In Romania, a proper environmental policy (defined as “an integrated system of
environmental priorities and objectives, methods and tools directed to ensure the sustainable use of
natural resources and prevent degradation of environment”(European Communities, 2009, p.12) or
“a set of coherent measures and means seeking to preserve the support capacity of natural
systems”(Negrei, 1999, p. 14) can be considered since 1990s in the context of the adoption of
sustainable development as a priority when “environmental policy has become an overall policy,
recognizing its importance for the harmonious development of society.” (Rojanschi et al., 2003, p.
47) Naturally, sustainable development involves linking the international trade as one of the main
pillars of economic growth with environmental protection.
The awareness of international trade and environment relationship and the awareness of
policies complementarities concerning these two areas appear from the international position taken
by Romania, also in numerous trade policy measures implemented over the years that actually are
environmentally friendly. Romania's international position is reflected by the participation at
conventions, agreements and organizations responsible for the regulations and the control of
international trade and environmental issues.
Thus, Romania signed over 250 bilateral and multilateral environmental agreements and
conventions concerning the air quality, nature protection, water quality, waste management,
chemicals and reduction of the nuclear accidents effects which are implemented through national
legislation always completed and updated.
Among these, particularly important are the Basel Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. In
1991 Romania signed the Basel Convention, pledging not to export or import pollutants waste that
could harm the environment. In 2001, Romania has developed the National Waste Management
Strategy aimed to implement an integrated management system waste, economically efficient and
environmentally friendly.
After joining the EU from July 15, 2007, Romanian practice adopted the European Regulation
No 1013/2006 concerning the waste shipments. According to Government Decision (GD)

control of import, export and transit of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes.
Romania, also, signed the Kyoto Protocol (1997) on combating global warming, the 8%
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions between 2008-2012 requirements were more than satisfied,
the Romanian industrial production decrease allowed a reduction of 46%. Unfortunately, the
opportunity of green certificates trading abroad was not sufficiently well managed and harnessed,
loosing substantial revenues needed to complete the environmental protection funds. Romania’s
concerns about the harmonization of relations between trade and the environment are the most
eloquent reflected from the position adopted by the GATT / WTO. Within this multilateral
institutional system, Romania has steadily pronounced even before 1995 for trade liberalization and
simultaneous for addressing the environmental global problems through the multilateral
environmental agreements path that should function in character and complementary to the
multilateral trading system rules.
According to this position, after WTO creation, Romania argued that the trade and
environment agenda negotiations should include the following objectives: clarification in a
multilateral framework of the relationship between MEAs and WTO rules, members' rights to
invoke the precautionary principle within the environmental issues, avoiding the use of
discriminatory practices and develop new multilateral disciplines regarding the eco-labelling. To
achieve these goals, along with signing the Final Act at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994, Romania
agreed, also, the formation of the WTO Committee on trade and environment.
The multitude of trade policy measures interfering with environmental policy aim issues such
as:
- Protection of animal health, prevention of disease transmissions from animals to humans,
food safety;
- Compliance with the quarantine rules and phytosanitary certificates required for import and
export of the plants and vegetable products;
- Monitoring the compliance with environmental protection measures involving the
submission to customs authority along with the customs import or export declarations, the
environmental permits issued by the competent environmental protection authorities;
- Use restriction or ban of hazardous chemicals in accordance with international conventions
to which Romania is a member party;
- Quality control of medicines and medical devices, import/export of which is performed only
by special permits issued by the health authorities;

undergone the cleansing and disinfection.
After accession, Romania took over the EU's common policies, including trade and
environmental policy. According to these, the current objectives of Romania in the field of
environment are: protection and improvement of the environment, protection of public health,
rational and prudent use of natural resources and promoting measures at international level to tackle
and solve the regional and global environmental problems. As instruments, most commonly used
are: legislation, particularly environmental quality directives (pollution levels, etc.), products norms
(concentration limits, emission, etc.) environmental programs and financial aid programs.
Note that all of these tools may be trade barriers to market access, most frequently identified
are: environmental standards and regulations, labelling and eco-labelling and a number of economic
instruments.
In terms of standardization, Romania has a relatively long experience, started since joining in
1928 as a member of the International Electrotechnical Commission. Since 1998, Romania is
represented in international standardization process by the Romania Standards Association. This is
a private association of public interest whose duties are to coordinate the national standardization
activities and exchange information with exterior in this area.
By their nature there are two types of standards: product standards, which refer to the
characteristics of goods (performance requirements, minimum nutrient content, maximum toxicity
of exhaust emissions, etc.) and process standards concerning the conditions of manufacture.
In Romanian practice can be found following national standards: Romanian original standards
with SR or STAT indication; Romanian standards that have adopted a European standard: SR EN or
SR EN ISO; Romanian standards that have adopted an international standard: SR ISO; Romanian
standards that have adopted an amendment and Romanian standards that have adopted an errata.
According to standardization methodology, original Romanian standards and those which
have adopted an international standard should be examined every 5 years after publication,
reviewing, modification or reconfirmation and original national standards what become in conflict
with the adopted European standards should be cancelled.
Note that the updating and alignment of Romanian legislation and standards to those
European and international is a condition of export promotion. In this respect, low no. 608/2001 on
the conformity assessment of products expressly provides in Article 7 that “technical regulations
shall refer to harmonized European standards adopted nationally conferring presumption of
conformity with the essential requirements.” As well are the laws no. 312/2003, 348/2003, and

quality standards.
Concerning labelling, this can be mandatory or voluntary and it provides information to users
or consumers about the positive impact (biodegradability, etc.) or negative (toxicity, flammability,
etc.) of the product or manufacturing process on the environment and health. In some cases it can
provide information about the geographic indicators or country of origin. The content of the
messages transmitted by the labels can have an important impact on the dynamics of trading flows.
As awareness of environmental deterioration, a growing share on international market tends to have
the environmentally friendly products. They are identified by the beneficiary through the eco-label.
Eco-label is a voluntary label for products with minimal impact on human health and environment.
The EU Eco-label - “European Flower” was introduced in 1992 by the European Commission.
Currently, the award procedure is governed by the Regulation no. 1980/2000 of the European
Parliament and Council. European Eco-label is meant to establish a unique certification scheme at
the Community level for green and environmentally friendly products.
Romanian legislation transposed the provisions of European Regulation No. 1980/2000
through the GD. 189/2002, repealed by GD. 236/2007 on a revised system for granting the
Community eco-label. In compliance with European and international legislation for
implementation of Community Eco-label scheme, in Romania was created the National
Commission for eco-label. It functions as an advisory body with an active decisional role regarding
the eco-labels.
The main categories of products concerned to be labelled are: household appliances
(refrigerators, wash machine, vacuums, TVs, etc.), laptops, detergents, soil improvers, paints and
varnishes for interior, heat pumps, accommodations for tourists, camping services etc.
Although, in principle the Eco-label scheme is open to all products and services, some
categories are expressly excluded. These are: toxic substances obtained through harmful means for
humans or the environment, food, beverages, pharmaceutical and medical devices. The range of
economic instruments which seek to influence the behaviour of economic agents by internalizing
the environmental costs is varied (see Figure 1). In Romania the highest use have the fiscal tools,
such as environmental taxes. In terms of resource allocation, the financial taxes benefits as
described by specialists (Vuţă, 2004, p. 67) are twofold: concerning the economic optimum, the
financial charge makes that for every public rendered service to match a price; from environmental
point of view, the tax exerts an incentive effect which diminish the volume of emissions and waste.

considerations, the real motive is more likely financial-budgetary. Paradoxically, among the 15
taxes on activities with potential impact on the environment, only (first registration tax, tax for
pollutants emissions into the atmosphere, packaging tax and the tax for tires) brought significant
revenue to the Environmental Fund.
The modest contributions for supplying this fund are not related to the lack of potential of
charged fields, but especially to the methodological difficulties of tax implementation and income
collection.
So far, the most important contribution to the Environmental Fund revenues was carried by
the first registration tax, recently became “environmental stamp”. The obtained Fund administration
incomes may be used only to finance the Program for stimulating the national car park renewal and
the projects regarding the environmental protection.
Figure 1 - Classification of Economic Instruments

Source: Panayotou, Th., (1994) Economic instruments for environmental management and sustainable development, Environmental
Economics Series Paper No. 16, UNEP, p. 9.

significant effects of discrimination between producers and consumers of gasoline and diesel cars
and electric cars or hybrids, among buyers who purchase new cars and old cars, also by the
assessment methodology is infringed the “polluter pays” principle, the fiscal burden being borne by
the final consumers, regardless of the car usability.
Other fiscal instruments with significant commercial and ecological effects are the tax: on
packaging, on the hazardous substances, on tires and on the oils wastes introduced by the low no.
167/2010.
CONCLUSIONS
From the above it follows that in the context of efforts to promote sustainable development, it
was registered a significant progress towards harmonization of international trade relations and the
environment. However there are still some inconsistencies and legal and institutional failures
related largely to the prevalence of the importance of objectives: the economic growth or the
environmental protection, specifically to developing countries; and more recently related to the
phenomena of economic and financial crises. It is expected that Romania will promote the
strengthening and simultaneous optimization of trade and environmental policies for the future
sustainable development.

REFERENCES
Barbier, E. (1994)Natural capital and the economics of environment and de-velopment; in: A.
Jansson, M. Hammer, C. Folke and R. Costanza (eds.): Invest-ing in natural capital: the
ecological economics approach to sustainability, Washington D.C.: Island Press, pp. 291-322.
Beckerman, W. (1992) Economic Growth and the Environment: Whose Growth? Whose
Environment?, World Development, Issue 20, pp. 481–96.
Beghin, J. (2000) Environment and Trade in Developing Economies: A Primer for the World Bank's
Global Economic Prospects 2000, Working Paper 00-WP 247, World Bank.
Brack, D. (2000) Trade and environment after Seattle, RIIA Briefing Paper, New Series No. 13.

IISD, p. 21.
Copeland, B., Talyor, S. (1994) North-South Trade and the Environment, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Volume 109, pp. 755-787.
Eckersley R. (2004) The Big Chill: The WTO and Multilateral Environmental Agreements, Global
Environmental Politics, Volume 4, Issue 2, p. 28.
European Communities (2009) The environmental goods and services sector, Methodologies and
Working papers, Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
Georgescu Roegen, N. (1996) Legea entropiei şi procesul economic, Bucharest: Publishing House
Expert.
Khatun, F. (2004) Environmental Debates in the WTO: Defining Bangladesh’s Interests, Paper No.
35, CPD Occasional Paper Series, Dhaka.
Mahe, L.P. (1997) Environment and quality standards in the WTO: New protectionism in
agricultural trade? An European perspective, European Review of Agricultural Economics,
no. 24, p. 489.
Markandaya, A., Pearce, D. (1988) Natural environments and the social rate of discount, Project
Appraisal, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 2– 12.
Negrei C. (1999) Instrumente si metode în managementul mediului, Editura Economica, Bucuresti.
Neumayer, E. (1998) Is Economic Growth the Environment’s Best Friend?, Journal of
Environmental Law and Policy2/98, pp. 161-176.
OECD (1994) Methodologies for Environment and trade Reviews, OCDE/GD(94)103, Paris.
OECD (1999) Multilateral Environmental Agreements: Synthesis Report of Three Cases Studies.
Paris: Joint Working Party on Trade and Environment, COM/ENV/TD (98)127, p. 63.
OECD (2000) Politique environnementale et efficacité économique, Paris.
Panayotou, Th., (1994) Economic instruments for environmental management and sustainable
development, Environmental Economics Series Paper No. 16, UNEP.
Platon, V. (1997) Protecţia mediului şi dezvoltarea economică: Instituţii şi mecanisme în perioada
de tranziţie, Ed. Didactică și Pedagogică, Bucharest.
Rojanschi, V., Bran. F., Diaconu, S., Grigore, F. (2003) Abordări economice în protecţia
mediului,Publishing House ASE, Bucharest.
Siebert, H. (1996)Trade Policy and Environmental Protection, Bleckwell Publishes Ltd, pp. 183194.
Sprenger, R. (1997) Globalization, Employment and Environment, OECD Paris, p. 29.

Trade Organization, American Journal of Economics and Business Administration, Vol. 1,
Issue 4, p. 287.
Vuţă, M. (2004) Politici si strategii financiare de protectia mediului, Publishing House ASE,
Bucharest.

JEL Classification: F18; Q34; Q56; Q57.

INTRODUCTION
Complex relationships between international trade and the environment is one of the most
significant moments of the economic development – environment correlation. The importance of
this sequence has grew in the recent decades due to increasing pressures of the economic
development on the environment and the maximizing role of international trade as an engine of
and environmental policies on the trade between countries.
With reference to the first side of correlation, it specifies that international trade is not a direct
source of environmental degradation or improvement. The potential positive or negative impact is
indirect, mediated by its effects on production and consumption. Consumption and production as
main components of economic activity, alongside with rigor and suitability of environmental policy,
are part of the fundamental determinants which influence the environmental improvement or
degradation.
From the international trade perspective, the dimension of environmental impact depends of
the amount and frequency of transactions significant conditioned by the degree of trade
liberalization. Consequently, the theoretical analysis was focused on the impact of international
trade liberalization on the environment. Outstanding contributions to this subject have been made
by a number of neoclassical theorists and the so-called “ecological economists”(like Costanza,
Daly, Hall, Jansson, Hannon, Odum, Pimentl, and Martinez-Alie) and the promoters of sustainable
development (“environmental economists”, like Hanley, Shogren, White, Wallace, Oates, and
Stavins).
The negative environmental impact of liberalization is conveyed in literature especially by the
environmentalists. They believe that at least on the short term, trade liberalization could trigger a
vicious circle of effects which involve environmental degradation. Initiation and propagation of
these effects are motivated by different situations, such as: amplification of international
specialization in intensive polluting products which are using exhaustible natural resources (mining,
forestry, fisheries, etc.); facilitation of trade with hazardous substances and waste; extension of
transport distances with carbon growth effects; stimulation for firms relocation in countries with
permissive environmental standards; deepening the nationally and internationally income gaps; the
orientation of “disadvantaged” towards consumption of natural resources whose amplification
adversely affects the environment etc.
Such negative effects are mediated by the economic growth processes and favoured by the
underestimation of natural resources and generally lack of adequate environmental policies capable
to ensuring the internalization of environmental costs.
But most of these debates participants contest the environmentalists’ points of view,
describing the environmental impact of international trade as positive. Especially, the liberalization
adepts (Beckerman, 1992; Barbier, 1994; Markandaya, 1988; Copeland and Talyor, 1994) believe
that trade and investment barriers reduction generates wealth, including the movement of

the welfare is likely to increase living standards, the demand for a cleaner environment and finally
the environmental protection. In general, the positive environmental impact of international trade
liberalization is supported by numerous arguments relating to such issues:
- Efficient allocation of the environmental resources that determines the improve of
production structure for goods less intensive in natural resources, based on lower energy
consumption and lower degree of pollution;
- Facilitation of international transfer of environmental and less polluting technologies. Trade
openness facilitates such the abandonment of old, inefficient and polluting (the former communist
countries) power plants in favour of the modern one with combined cycle which encourages the use
of alternative sources: wind, solar and tidal. Including the multinational companies, often
considered criminals in terms of exploitation of developing countries resources, are interested and
can afford new, efficient and less polluting technologies. As a result there is an intensive
modernization and revitalization of polluting sectors previously protected;
-Convergence of environmental standards of products and processes to the highest levels in
the world. Thus, more stringent environmental policies from developed countries may be imported
into countries with lax standards voluntarily in the context of enhancing mutual relations or
involuntarily by treating with trade sanctions, or following the adoption of new regulations aimed
for harmonizing the environmental standards;
- Encouraging the development of organic products markets;
- Elimination of subsidies and distorted prices in closed economies including the alignment of
world prices;
- Encouragement of international cooperation regarding the environmental protection, etc.
As a synthesis of the arguments presented above, in the literature was detailed a broad
typology of environmental effects of trade liberalization. The most representative is the approach
proposed by the OECD (OECD, 2000 and Sprenger, 1997, p. 29). According to this, reported to
international trade in goods, by the nature and scope of their manifestation can be distinguished two
main classes of effects: those that define the economic impact and those that target the impact of
trade liberalization in the legal framework.
In the first class are framed: the scale effect, the structural effect, the effect of product and
technological effect.
The scale effect as a propagation mechanism takes place at the macro-economic level: trade
liberalization generates an enhanced role of trade that involves increased economic activity, and

use of environmental resources, possibly even an environmental degradation. The scale effect is
positive if the growth process creates an increasing demand for environmental improvement and the
financial gains are allocated for this purpose. Conversely, scale effects are negative in the absence
of a proper environmental management and conditions an excessive use of natural resources,
increasing pollution and failure of the environmental costs internalization.
Structural effect refers to the consequences of trade liberalization on the resource use,
production processes and economic activity in general. To the extent that liberalization leads to a
better allocation of resources and efficient production and consumption, the structural effect is
positive. The persistence of inadequate mechanisms of environmental costs internalization
generates negative structural effects by perpetuating the inefficient resources allocations in favour
of the intensive natural resource and high polluting activities.
The product effect captures the beneficial or harmful nature of the product whose
international movement is encouraged by liberalization. Thus, it will be registered positive product
effects in case of enhancing trade with ecological goods, technologies and energy efficiently
machines. Negative effects appear when there is facilitated the trade with environmentally harmful
substances like: toxic wastes, hazardous chemicals, endangered species, etc.
The technological effect captures the changes of the production technologies. Negative
technological effects may occur if the polluting industries are relocated in “pollution havens” or
there are promoted for export the outdated cheap technologies which are not meeting the
environmental standards. By contrast, technological effects are considered positive if the
liberalization encourages trade in goods, services and technologies, more “friendly” to the
environment (less resources consumption, less emissions, reduced pollution per unit of product).
The positive effects will be amplified in the context of trade agreements that encourage ISO considered the main vehicle of advanced technologies and in the presence of the positive scale
effects manifested by the increased revenue and national wealth and hence the augmented demand
for “clean” technologies and stricter and more rigorous pollution standards and environmental
legislation.
The second class defined by OECD takes into account the regulatory effects and it concerns to
the consequences of trade reforms and agreements on the national measures, standards, policies and
environmental regulations. These effects can be negative when the harmonization of national
regulations with the trade agreements neutralizes the ability of governments to adopt appropriate
environmental standards and policies in relation to their levels of environmental risks and their

when the trade agreements create a favourable framework for cooperation concerning the necessary
institutional reforms for increasing the environmental standards.
In conclusion it can be said that, by itself, trade liberalization cannot be considered good or
bad for the environment. The generalization in positive or negative terms can lead to erroneous
conclusions. For example, in terms of negative effects could be argued the false idea that autarkic
countries would have the cleanest environments. In fact, the nature of the net effect of trade
liberalization on the environment depends of the compatibility between the openness of trade
policies with environmental policies, in sense of making their goals compatible, even
complementary and mutually supportive.
Trade and environment has emerged as a distinct subject in the economic analysis, especially
with the second sense of the correlation. It aims not the direct environmental impact on international
trade, but especially the effects of environmental regulations and policies on the trade between
countries.
Undoubtedly, as any economic activity the international trade is conditioned by the
environment in multiple aspects: the “endowment with factors” specific to each country based on
the geographical position; climate changes generating calamities (floods, landslides, etc.) or global
warming which may change the structure of comparative advantages in trade with bio-food etc.;
might be changed even the supply chains, transportation, distribution in international trade with
certain products or, during the extreme events (such as hurricanes), temporarily stop the ports and
routes activities or can cause infrastructural damages, all reflected in cost increases.
If the overall impact of the environment on trade is easier to elucidate theoretically, the
environmental regulations and policies effects on the trade, are more controversial, they are
approached from the perspective of a wide range of interest groups. Even when standards and
regulations are honestly motivated by the pollution control requirements and the environmental
protection, the companies’ compliance costs become higher, so they might register relative
disadvantages compared to competitors. The disputes are fuelled by the suspicion that the promoters
of environmental regulations and standards actually use them as disguised barriers to imports. In
this sense, developed countries are accused of promoting “green protectionism” established by strict
environmental rules and standards what especially less developed countries do not qualify for. In
turn, developing economies are suspected of a so-called “eco-dumping” resulted from their
engagement in a real race for lax environmental regulations, able to attract foreign investors to
boost their production and exports (Siebert, 1996, p. 188).

policies on the product life cycle when targeting certain characteristics of the goods or
manufacturing technology, the effects of ISO 14000 registration enforcement and compliance on
the small and medium size companies which the cost increases can be so high as to no longer afford
the output on external markets.
As a result we mention that the international trade and environment is a two-ways, multidimensional and often conflicting relation. Approached from the perspective of different ideologies
and especially from the standpoint of a wide range of conflicting interests, international trade –
environment correlation resulted rather in a set of multiple dilemmas than a single problem solved
by an economic general model.
2.

RECONCILIATION

BETWEEN

INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

AND

ENVIRONMENT - CONCERN OF GATT / WTO
The GATT / WTO system was created to provide to its members appropriate multilateral
framework for all aspects of trade negotiations concerning the regulation, promotion, development
and liberalization of international trade. In this regard, the aspects often included on the negotiation
agenda are those relating to avoid or eliminate conflicting relationship between trade and
environment.
The conflicts arise when manufacturing processes, regulations concerning the consumption of
certain natural resources, trade in products or waste are generating negative environmental
externalities for other states, which can cause loss of wealth. To the extent that these losses are not
reflected in the cost of transactions, establishment of restrictive trade measures such as:
environmental taxes, quotas, prohibitions or other regulations are perfectly justified in case of
environmental protection and human welfare. The problem is that the distinction between trade
measures aimed for real environmental objectives and the unjustified and discriminatory measures
applied for obstructing imports is quite difficult. This is, precisely, the main focus of the GATT /
WTO system concerning trade and environment.
Following the evolution of environmental concerns into the multilateral trading system, we
observe that the early GATT has not been given attention to this issue. Even the notion of
“environment” was not expressly mentioned in the legal text of GATT. Environmental concerns
arise regarding the exceptions to the fundamental principles of “most favoured nation” clause and
“national treatment” clause applied to “like products”. Given that, there are situations when the

production methods and techniques, art. XX GATT allows member countries to determine their
own level of environmental protection within its borders through the appropriate trade measures and
in justified cases may deviate from fundamental principles of GATT. Exceptions provided in art.
XX of GATT which such measures may be instituted refers to the protection of life or health of
humans, animals or plants and the conservation of exhaustible natural resources. (Stein, 2009, p.
287) Naturally, acceptance of such measures occurs “such measures are not applied in a manner
which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where
the same conditions prevail, or a disguised restriction on international trade” (Eckersley, 2004, p.
28).
More generally, we can say that, in fact, all GATT / WTO rules, regulations and principles are
related to environmental protection, because provide the preparation, negotiation and
implementation of trade measures for environmental purpose and in the same time aim to ensure
and achieve a balance between the member rights to adopt own trade measures for environmental
protection.
This last point is very visible in the contents of specific agreements convened during the
Tokyo Round. It is the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Agreement on Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures.
The first agreement assumes that the need of technical regulations and standards is universal
accepted. The “technical regulations” are understood as mandatory requirements for products,
related processes and production methods, and the “standards” as voluntary requirements. The
agreement recognizes and guarantees the right of each State to choose their desired level of
protection, avoiding the situations when the violation of technical regulations or adoption of
national more stringent standards would create disguised barriers to imports. Therefore the
agreement encourages the adoption and practice of international standards and harmonization of
conformity assessment procedures. To manage the achievements of this Agreement objectives,
there were established the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Dispute Settlement
Body on technical regulations and standards.
The SPM Agreement aims to respect the sovereign right of member countries to ensure the
appropriate level of health protection, but guaranteeing that this right is not arbitrarily used for
protectionist purposes. This agreement is based on principles of necessity and scientific
justification, exclusion of arbitrary discrimination, harmonization, equivalence and adequate level

489).
More prominent appear the concerns regarding the trade and environment relations in the
WTO frame. From the content of the Agreement Preamble establishing the WTO, sustainable
development, environmental protection and conservation are integrated into the multilateral trading
system and have been adopted as fundamental objectives of the new organization which has
substituted the GATT secretariat.
Subsequently, through the Development Agenda, in the new round of negotiations, was
requested to be addressed and evaluated the relationship between the GATT / WTO norms which
were already established and the specific trade obligations set out in the multilateral environmental
agreements (MEAs).
Currently, the trade and environment issues are handled by the WTO Committee on Trade and
Environment. The roles and issues on the agenda of this committee give us a fairly and complete
picture of the broad spectrum of environmental concerns in the GATT/WTO system.
According to the decision establishing the Committee on Trade and Environment, it has two
main missions:
-To identify, define and evaluate the relationship between trade and environmental measures
for supporting sustainable development; and
-To do recommendations for improving the provisions of the multilateral trading system
concerning: strengthening the positive interaction between trade and environmental measures, with
special attention to the needs of developing countries, particularly the least developed countries;
avoiding the protectionism and compliance with multilateral discipline, so as to ensure
responsiveness of the multilateral system to environmental objectives and supervision of trade
measures used for environmental purposes.
These tasks are detailed in the ten articles of the Committee Agenda reflecting the priority of
environmental objectives and the focus on the relationship between trade rules on the one hand and
on the other hand: general environmental policies with trade effects, trade measures used for
environmental purposes such as environmental taxes, environmental requirements for products,
including packaging, labelling, standards and regulations for recycling. Other problems included on
Committee Agenda refer to the transparency of trade measures for environmental and
environmental policies, the environmental measures potential to function as barriers for developing
country exports; the issues concerning the exports of prohibited goods on the internal markets; the
specific environmental requirements of trade in services and transactions covered by the TRIPS

the regulation of disputes etc..
Given the complex issues covered and the divergence of interests between the member
countries, although the environmental concerns in the multilateral trading system have intensified,
progresses towards reconciliation between trade and the environment are still slow. But GATT /
WTO system remains the mainstay and also the most appropriate framework for the design,
negotiation, adopting and monitoring the commercial and environmental disciplines for promotion
of sustainable development.
3.

COMMERCIAL

ASPECTS

OF

MULTILATERAL

ENVIRONMENTAL

AGREEMENTS (MEAS)
In the new context of globalization increased international trade occurs concomitantly with
increased threats from global warming, ozone depletion, persistent organic substances pollution
amplification and biodiversity degradation. In this context, and given cross-border trade flows and
environmental issues, international cooperation, reflected in the absence of a World Environment
Organization, mainly in Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) appears as the best
recommended way to avoid collisions between international trade and environment.
MEAs are agreements between States which establish principles, rights and obligations
undertaking by parties to respect the environmental purposes. Currently are operating over 300
MEAs, whose content aims to regulate and prevent the environmental challenges through a variety
of specific tools (legal, economic, technical, and commercial, etc.).About 30 of these are focused on
the use of environmental trade measures. The most representative are presented briefly below:
-Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES)signed in 1973, Romania joined in 1993, provides the framework for conservation of
species traded on the international market, but outside of commercial regulations could become
endangered. According to this convention, trade management of such species is based on biological
information and monitoring how the various types of trade regulations can affect these species.
Thus, transactions with covered species must be authorized by limited license granted allowances
which determine the maximum number of patterns that can be traded.
-Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (1985) and Montreal Protocol
(1987), which Romania joined in 1993 to. Convention is a framework document which doesn’t
intend to control the ozone depletion, but rather to establish the procedure rules for future protocols.

the Ozone Layer. Protocol prohibits the trade with products and substances that deplete the ozone
layer, whose applications are managed through a licensing system. Protocol insists more on the
obtained results and as tools recommends combining trade measures with instruments which control
domestic production and consumption, leaving to the states free choice of measures such as: taxes
on substances that deplete the ozone, incentives taxes to substitute these substances, production
quotas, quotas or import/export bans, technical product standards, labelling rules, etc. The Montreal
Protocol is considered by the OECD as the first agreement using trade measures as part of an
integrated package of world politics, aimed addressing a truly global problem (OECD, 1999, p.63).
- Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and
their Disposal adopted in 1989(Romania joined in 1991) is the only international institution dealing
with this distinct class of products, which is not covered by the WTO documents (Brack and Gray,
2003, p.21.). Convention aims to protect the people and the environment against adverse effects of
production, distribution and transportation of hazardous waste. Trade measures proposed for
controlling trade in hazardous waste is based on information and prior consent. This means that a
signatory country has the right to ban the entry or disposal of hazardous waste on its territory. But if
it expresses written consent for importing or receiving such wastes and the agreement is signed by
the transit countries, such delivery between the two signatory countries can take place. Concerning
the non-signatory countries, trade with such products is prohibited in the absence of separate
agreements with them. Experts consider that Convention has legitimized and encouraged
international trade and less contributed to combat and reduce the wastes.
-Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (1992) (Romania joined in 1994) aims to record
the ecological diversity. It also authorizes special trade measures in this regard, but seeks to regulate
the issues with large commercial impact such as: resource access regime, the prevention of biopiracy and the division of profits, agricultural biodiversity, exotic species regulations, transfer of
knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous communities on local species, etc. Of great
importance is the Cartagena Protocol (2000, Romania 2003) on Biosafety, signed under this
Convention auspices. The Protocol is the first international treaty that aims to regulate
transboundary movements of genetically modified organisms. Mainly, it aims to ensure the
possibility of importers to assess the environmental risks of genetically modified organisms before
performing the operation and insists that Biosafety regulations should be applied in conformity with
WTO rules so as not turning into trade barriers to imports.

stabilize the greenhouse gases concentrations in atmosphere at a level that would prevent harmful
anthropogenic interferences in the climate system. Under the auspices of this Convention was
drafted in 1997 and scheduled to take effect in 2005 Kyoto Protocol aimed to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and especially carbon dioxide emissions reduction. Proposed measures for combating
climate changes are not purely commercial, but have large trade implications. The most frequently
recommended for achieving the Kyoto Protocol goals are the carbon taxes, plus internal policies
tools as subsidies for modernization of industrial reactors for the production of renewable energy
through more efficient and cleaner technologies. But beyond climate change mitigation measures
such taxation and subsidization have uneven repercussions on the international competitiveness.
Hence, the major tensions and conflicts may arise between the WTO norms and the Protocol
targets. This protocol has significant implications for the international trade with energy-intensive
facilities and equipment, fossil fuels and energy efficiently services.
-Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides (1998) (Romania joined in 2003) aims to regulate the international
movement of these products. Exports and imports of chemicals and pesticides are not prohibited,
but require the establishment and enforcement of some procedures preliminary agreed by the
importing country. Under this procedure mainly exporters are required to provide, including
labelling requirements, all information about the risks for the human health and the environment
and the compliance with the relevant international standards. When partner decides to establish
restrictions or prohibitions on imports, under this Convention, these should be applied to all external
suppliers of any third country and domestic producers.
-Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (2004) aims to regulate the
international movement of certain hazardous substances to hormonal functions of human and
animal health. Given the high rate of bio-accumulation, the length of persistence in time and their
great mobility and harmless, the Convention recommends to restrict and even eliminate the possible
use of such toxic substances even in small doses.
Beyond that each agreement is focused on specific areas and issues, MEAs have some
common characteristics. Thus, in general MEAs are widely agreed and supported by the
international community because: they are the results of transparent and wide - broad negotiations,
are substantiated by large-scale scientific research and recognize the special position of developing
countries, which may have limited capacity to participate in solving environmental problems. To
the extent that expressly provide environmental trade measures their purpose is: to provide adequate

international trade and unsustainable exploitation of natural resources; to discourage harmful
methods and processes of goods production and services traded on international markets; to prevent
or limit the entry of harmful substances in countries and create market opportunities and incentives
for clean use of goods.
Environmental trade measures are the only tools provided by MEA. They may be
accompanied or replaced by numerous other instruments, measures and policies that may have
impact on international trade. In this regard might be mentioned: financial assistance for industries,
including the purchase of environmental technologies; reporting obligation to monitor trade flows;
labelling rules; providing information including the relationship with the environment; rules for
notification; consent and movement-based permits; licenses; bilateral or general export or import
prohibitions etc.
The most important is whatever their nature, all the measures provided by MEAs that impact
the trade should be actually set to achieve environmental benefits and promote not disguised
protectionism.
4.

LIBERALIZATION

OF

INTERNATIONAL

TRADE

WITH

ORGANIC

PRODUCTS
Among the new issues included on WTO negotiations agenda is liberalization of international
trade with organic products. Reiterating the commitment of Member States for sustainable
development, the Doha Declaration (2001) expressly requests to reduce or eliminate tariffs and nontariff impediments to trade with organic products.
In WTO negotiations frame the environmental goods considered are divided into two classes:
A and B.
A class of “green traditional products” includes industrial goods used to provide
environmental services which address pollution and waste affecting water, soil and air (examples:
filters, pumps, reservoirs and containers, soft water purification chemicals, equipment sorting,
recycling, metering and environmental monitoring, etc.).
Class B “preferred organic products” includes industrial and consumer goods in their features
environmentally friendly (examples: organic products, biodegradable fibres, natural dyes, organic
soaps without phosphates, renewable energy equipment, etc.) and are “preferable” to replace goods
with similar uses, but harmful to the environment at the time of production, use and final disposal.

activities producing goods that can measure, prevent, limit, reduce or correct environmental damage
affecting water, air and soil or problems related to waste, noise and eco-systems. Identified as an
emerging sector, the eco-industry is rising, becoming increasingly complex and includes within its
production technologies, equipment and environmental services: wastewater treatment, waste
management and recycling; air pollution control; noise reduction; monitoring instruments for
natural resource conservation, etc..
Despite the rise of trade with environmental goods production is hampered by numerous tariff
and non-tariff barriers. Such barriers prevent the entrance on developed country markets of goods
from developing countries for which the exports of organic products is of great interest, and also the
OECD supplies of equipment and technologies for low-income countries.
In terms of tariff barriers, it is considered that the rates for imports of environmental products
is 0-3% for OECD countries, while for many low-income countries are about 8-9% and higher to
about 20% for some emerging economies (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, India, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand). The big difference between the average and maximum tariff agreed at the WTO
negotiations and the ease with which countries can drag to the maximum, give rise to uncertainty
for exporters.
To this are added the various non-tariff instruments affecting imports of environmental
products among the most frequently used ones are: standards, certifications and environmental
subsidies, quotas and other quantitative restrictions, marketing practice, distribution, logistics and
other various regulations. The specialists emphasize the technical standards and certification
procedures are the most discriminating tools against the entrance of environmental products on
developed country markets from developing countries (Khatun, 2004, p. 13). Under these
conditions the liberalization of environmental goods trade presents great interest and has wide
support, being motivated both commercially and environmentally.
In terms of trade liberalization means: new opportunities for export of environmental products
from developing countries to developed ones; opening of developing country markets for the knowhow, equipment and technologies supplied by OECD countries; competitiveness increase, the prices
diminution, supply augmentation and growth of quality of environmental products, etc.
Under this aspect, eco liberalization allows better access to green technologies, increase of
international environmental standards, pollution prevention and control according to national and
international regulations and compliance with sustainable development objectives.

products depends of internal reforms and the degree of compatibility between open markets and
national development objectives.
5. INTERNATIONAL TRADE – ENVIRONMENT RELATION IN THE CONTEXT
OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ROMANIA
In Romania, a proper environmental policy (defined as “an integrated system of
environmental priorities and objectives, methods and tools directed to ensure the sustainable use of
natural resources and prevent degradation of environment”(European Communities, 2009, p.12) or
“a set of coherent measures and means seeking to preserve the support capacity of natural
systems”(Negrei, 1999, p. 14) can be considered since 1990s in the context of the adoption of
sustainable development as a priority when “environmental policy has become an overall policy,
recognizing its importance for the harmonious development of society.” (Rojanschi et al., 2003, p.
47) Naturally, sustainable development involves linking the international trade as one of the main
pillars of economic growth with environmental protection.
The awareness of international trade and environment relationship and the awareness of
policies complementarities concerning these two areas appear from the international position taken
by Romania, also in numerous trade policy measures implemented over the years that actually are
environmentally friendly. Romania's international position is reflected by the participation at
conventions, agreements and organizations responsible for the regulations and the control of
international trade and environmental issues.
Thus, Romania signed over 250 bilateral and multilateral environmental agreements and
conventions concerning the air quality, nature protection, water quality, waste management,
chemicals and reduction of the nuclear accidents effects which are implemented through national
legislation always completed and updated.
Among these, particularly important are the Basel Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. In
1991 Romania signed the Basel Convention, pledging not to export or import pollutants waste that
could harm the environment. In 2001, Romania has developed the National Waste Management
Strategy aimed to implement an integrated management system waste, economically efficient and
environmentally friendly.
After joining the EU from July 15, 2007, Romanian practice adopted the European Regulation
No 1013/2006 concerning the waste shipments. According to Government Decision (GD)

control of import, export and transit of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes.
Romania, also, signed the Kyoto Protocol (1997) on combating global warming, the 8%
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions between 2008-2012 requirements were more than satisfied,
the Romanian industrial production decrease allowed a reduction of 46%. Unfortunately, the
opportunity of green certificates trading abroad was not sufficiently well managed and harnessed,
loosing substantial revenues needed to complete the environmental protection funds. Romania’s
concerns about the harmonization of relations between trade and the environment are the most
eloquent reflected from the position adopted by the GATT / WTO. Within this multilateral
institutional system, Romania has steadily pronounced even before 1995 for trade liberalization and
simultaneous for addressing the environmental global problems through the multilateral
environmental agreements path that should function in character and complementary to the
multilateral trading system rules.
According to this position, after WTO creation, Romania argued that the trade and
environment agenda negotiations should include the following objectives: clarification in a
multilateral framework of the relationship between MEAs and WTO rules, members' rights to
invoke the precautionary principle within the environmental issues, avoiding the use of
discriminatory practices and develop new multilateral disciplines regarding the eco-labelling. To
achieve these goals, along with signing the Final Act at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994, Romania
agreed, also, the formation of the WTO Committee on trade and environment.
The multitude of trade policy measures interfering with environmental policy aim issues such
as:
- Protection of animal health, prevention of disease transmissions from animals to humans,
food safety;
- Compliance with the quarantine rules and phytosanitary certificates required for import and
export of the plants and vegetable products;
- Monitoring the compliance with environmental protection measures involving the
submission to customs authority along with the customs import or export declarations, the
environmental permits issued by the competent environmental protection authorities;
- Use restriction or ban of hazardous chemicals in accordance with international conventions
to which Romania is a member party;
- Quality control of medicines and medical devices, import/export of which is performed only
by special permits issued by the health authorities;

undergone the cleansing and disinfection.
After accession, Romania took over the EU's common policies, including trade and
environmental policy. According to these, the current objectives of Romania in the field of
environment are: protection and improvement of the environment, protection of public health,
rational and prudent use of natural resources and promoting measures at international level to tackle
and solve the regional and global environmental problems. As instruments, most commonly used
are: legislation, particularly environmental quality directives (pollution levels, etc.), products norms
(concentration limits, emission, etc.) environmental programs and financial aid programs.
Note that all of these tools may be trade barriers to market access, most frequently identified
are: environmental standards and regulations, labelling and eco-labelling and a number of economic
instruments.
In terms of standardization, Romania has a relatively long experience, started since joining in
1928 as a member of the International Electrotechnical Commission. Since 1998, Romania is
represented in international standardization process by the Romania Standards Association. This is
a private association of public interest whose duties are to coordinate the national standardization
activities and exchange information with exterior in this area.
By their nature there are two types of standards: product standards, which refer to the
characteristics of goods (performance requirements, minimum nutrient content, maximum toxicity
of exhaust emissions, etc.) and process standards concerning the conditions of manufacture.
In Romanian practice can be found following national standards: Romanian original standards
with SR or STAT indication; Romanian standards that have adopted a European standard: SR EN or
SR EN ISO; Romanian standards that have adopted an international standard: SR ISO; Romanian
standards that have adopted an amendment and Romanian standards that have adopted an errata.
According to standardization methodology, original Romanian standards and those which
have adopted an international standard should be examined every 5 years after publication,
reviewing, modification or reconfirmation and original national standards what become in conflict
with the adopted European standards should be cancelled.
Note that the updating and alignment of Romanian legislation and standards to those
European and international is a condition of export promotion. In this respect, low no. 608/2001 on
the conformity assessment of products expressly provides in Article 7 that “technical regulations
shall refer to harmonized European standards adopted nationally conferring presumption of
conformity with the essential requirements.” As well are the laws no. 312/2003, 348/2003, and

quality standards.
Concerning labelling, this can be mandatory or voluntary and it provides information to users
or consumers about the positive impact (biodegradability, etc.) or negative (toxicity, flammability,
etc.) of the product or manufacturing process on the environment and health. In some cases it can
provide information about the geographic indicators or country of origin. The content of the
messages transmitted by the labels can have an important impact on the dynamics of trading flows.
As awareness of environmental deterioration, a growing share on international market tends to have
the environmentally friendly products. They are identified by the beneficiary through the eco-label.
Eco-label is a voluntary label for products with minimal impact on human health and environment.
The EU Eco-label - “European Flower” was introduced in 1992 by the European Commission.
Currently, the award procedure is governed by the Regulation no. 1980/2000 of the European
Parliament and Council. European Eco-label is meant to establish a unique certification scheme at
the Community level for green and environmentally friendly products.
Romanian legislation transposed the provisions of European Regulation No. 1980/2000
through the GD. 189/2002, repealed by GD. 236/2007 on a revised system for granting the
Community eco-label. In compliance with European and international legislation for
implementation of Community Eco-label scheme, in Romania was created the National
Commission for eco-label. It functions as an advisory body with an active decisional role regarding
the eco-labels.
The main categories of products concerned to be labelled are: household appliances
(refrigerators, wash machine, vacuums, TVs, etc.), laptops, detergents, soil improvers, paints and
varnishes for interior, heat pumps, accommodations for tourists, camping services etc.
Although, in principle the Eco-label scheme is open to all products and services, some
categories are expressly excluded. These are: toxic substances obtained through harmful means for
humans or the environment, food, beverages, pharmaceutical and medical devices. The range of
economic instruments which seek to influence the behaviour of economic agents by internalizing
the environmental costs is varied (see Figure 1). In Romania the highest use have the fiscal tools,
such as environmental taxes. In terms of resource allocation, the financial taxes benefits as
described by specialists (Vuţă, 2004, p. 67) are twofold: concerning the economic optimum, the
financial charge makes that for every public rendered service to match a price; from environmental
point of view, the tax exerts an incentive effect which diminish the volume of emissions and waste.

considerations, the real motive is more likely financial-budgetary. Paradoxically, among the 15
taxes on activities with potential impact on the environment, only (first registration tax, tax for
pollutants emissions into the atmosphere, packaging tax and the tax for tires) brought significant
revenue to the Environmental Fund.
The modest contributions for supplying this fund are not related to the lack of potential of
charged fields, but especially to the methodological difficulties of tax implementation and income
collection.
So far, the most important contribution to the Environmental Fund revenues was carried by
the first registration tax, recently became “environmental stamp”. The obtained Fund administration
incomes may be used only to finance the Program for stimulating the national car park renewal and
the projects regarding the environmental protection.
Figure 1 - Classification of Economic Instruments

Source: Panayotou, Th., (1994) Economic instruments for environmental management and sustainable development, Environmental
Economics Series Paper No. 16, UNEP, p. 9.

significant effects of discrimination between producers and consumers of gasoline and diesel cars
and electric cars or hybrids, among buyers who purchase new cars and old cars, also by the
assessment methodology is infringed the “polluter pays” principle, the fiscal burden being borne by
the final consumers, regardless of the car usability.
Other fiscal instruments with significant commercial and ecological effects are the tax: on
packaging, on the hazardous substances, on tires and on the oils wastes introduced by the low no.
167/2010.
CONCLUSIONS
From the above it follows that in the context of efforts to promote sustainable development, it
was registered a significant progress towards harmonization of international trade relations and the
environment. However there are still some inconsistencies and legal and institutional failures
related largely to the prevalence of the importance of objectives: the economic growth or the
environmental protection, specifically to developing countries; and more recently related to the
phenomena of economic and financial crises. It is expected that Romania will promote the
strengthening and simultaneous optimization of trade and environmental policies for the future
sustainable development.

REFERENCES
Barbier, E. (1994)Natural capital and the economics of environment and de-velopment; in: A.
Jansson, M. Hammer, C. Folke and R. Costanza (eds.): Invest-ing in natural capital: the
ecological economics approach to sustainability, Washington D.C.: Island Press, pp. 291-322.
Beckerman, W. (1992) Economic Growth and the Environment: Whose Growth? Whose
Environment?, World Development, Issue 20, pp. 481–96.
Beghin, J. (2000) Environment and Trade in Developing Economies: A Primer for the World Bank's
Global Economic Prospects 2000, Working Paper 00-WP 247, World Bank.
Brack, D. (2000) Trade and environment after Seattle, RIIA Briefing Paper, New Series No. 13.

IISD, p. 21.
Copeland, B., Talyor, S. (1994) North-South Trade and the Environment, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Volume 109, pp. 755-787.
Eckersley R. (2004) The Big Chill: The WTO and Multilateral Environmental Agreements, Global
Environmental Politics, Volume 4, Issue 2, p. 28.
European Communities (2009) The environmental goods and services sector, Methodologies and
Working papers, Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
Georgescu Roegen, N. (1996) Legea entropiei şi procesul economic, Bucharest: Publishing House
Expert.
Khatun, F. (2004) Environmental Debates in the WTO: Defining Bangladesh’s Interests, Paper No.
35, CPD Occasional Paper Series, Dhaka.
Mahe, L.P. (1997) Environment and quality standards in the WTO: New protectionism in
agricultural trade? An European perspective, European Review of Agricultural Economics,
no. 24, p. 489.
Markandaya, A., Pearce, D. (1988) Natural environments and the social rate of discount, Project
Appraisal, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 2– 12.
Negrei C. (1999) Instrumente si metode în managementul mediului, Editura Economica, Bucuresti.
Neumayer, E. (1998) Is Economic Growth the Environment’s Best Friend?, Journal of
Environmental Law and Policy2/98, pp. 161-176.
OECD (1994) Methodologies for Environment and trade Reviews, OCDE/GD(94)103, Paris.
OECD (1999) Multilateral Environmental Agreements: Synthesis Report of Three Cases Studies.
Paris: Joint Working Party on Trade and Environment, COM/ENV/TD (98)127, p. 63.
OECD (2000) Politique environnementale et efficacité économique, Paris.
Panayotou, Th., (1994) Economic instruments for environmental management and sustainable
development, Environmental Economics Series Paper No. 16, UNEP.
Platon, V. (1997) Protecţia mediului şi dezvoltarea economică: Instituţii şi mecanisme în perioada
de tranziţie, Ed. Didactică și Pedagogică, Bucharest.
Rojanschi, V., Bran. F., Diaconu, S., Grigore, F. (2003) Abordări economice în protecţia
mediului,Publishing House ASE, Bucharest.
Siebert, H. (1996)Trade Policy and Environmental Protection, Bleckwell Publishes Ltd, pp. 183194.
Sprenger, R. (1997) Globalization, Employment and Environment, OECD Paris, p. 29.

Trade Organization, American Journal of Economics and Business Administration, Vol. 1,
Issue 4, p. 287.
Vuţă, M. (2004) Politici si strategii financiare de protectia mediului, Publishing House ASE,
Bucharest.

