ECOROM – Indicators System Proposal of Quality Certification in Ecotourism

Hornoiu Remus1, T nase Mihai Ovidiu2 and Nistoreanu Puiu3
1) 2) 3)
The Bucharest Academy of Economic Studies, Romania
E-mail: rhornoiu@yahoo.com
E-mail: tmovidiu@yahoo.com
E-mail: puiu.nistoreanu@com.ase.ro

Abstract
Open to trends in tourism development on European and world level, Romanian tourism
improves under its impact, developing specific recognition criteria at global level, regarding
the quality of services and cultural and natural attractions it owns. Developing a set of
indicators based on performance which can be integrated into the ecotourism certification,
provides an objective and scientific assessment of implementation and development of
programs in tourism, taking into consideration their efficiency and, on this basis, embracing
appropriate strategic decisions. Starting from the international experience in the field of
certification, it was synthesized, in this paper, a set of core indicators that can be
implemented in every local community, as a first step in the process of certification of the
services offered to tourists. There were analyzed over 30 international certification systems,
aiming both common points but also differentiation elements. Combining the international
experience in this field with national specificities, a set of indicators is proposed, this paper,
that may lead to a national certification system of ecotouristic services within a local
community. The deployment of such a system in the tourism branch represents a first step
for quality services, for the modernization of the Romanian tourism in accordance to some
of the newest trends existing in the world: the requirements of sustainable tourism.
Keywords: certification,
sustainable tourism.

indicator

system,

ecotourism, sustainable

development,

JEL Classification: L15, L83, Q20, Q50,
Introduction
In the tourism sector, both natural and anthropogenic element plays an important role in the
progress of the activity. They form the essential element which differentiates tourist
services from any other type of services, without which this sector could not exist. Any sort
of tourism is based either on natural resources (eg seaside tourism, spa etc.) or on the
anthropogenic ones (eg cultural or religious tourism, etc.). Under these circumstances, in
ecotourism field, the natural environment plays an important role, for several reasons. First
of all, it is an attraction point that seduces tourists to that particular destination due to its
unaltered landscape. Secondly, eco-tourism implies a bilateral relationship between nature
and tourism services. In ecotourism field, the touristic services (accommodation, food,

and anthropogenic environment. A third negative aspect is the practice called
"Greenwashing". This refers to the companies that call themselves "sustainable,"
"ecological", green "," responsible "," ecoturistic "but they actually do not meet the
generally accepted standards, or are in contradiction with these concepts. (P. Nistoreanu.
Ecotourism and Rural Tourism, 2006).
The issue of certification of ecotourism and sustainable tourism in the quality of tourism
services have been addressed by the following authors: Martha Honey (Ecotourism &
Certification: Setting standards in practice, Island Press, Washington D.C., 2002), Font X.
(Environmental certification in tourism and hospitality: progress, process and prospects,
Tourism Management 23 (2002) 197-205, Elsevier Ltd.), Blumer A. (Ecoturism
certification in Romania – a tool for nature conservation and responsible marketing –
scientific paper Global tourism Conference 2007, Oslo, Norway), Sanabria R. (Quebec+5:
Enhancing benefits and addressing challenges of sustainable tourism certification, scientific
paper Global tourism Conference 2007, Oslo, Norway), Eriksen J. (Blue Flag and Green
key Eco-labels, scientific paper Global tourism Conference 2007, Oslo, Norway).
Most certification programs in ecotourism presented by them are created to assess
environmental performance, economic and socio-cultural tourism products, but in most
cases they do not quantify these features; as it will be shown in this paper some of them are
limited to an assertion of principles or conditions to be met and / or a degree of
achievement. Fundamental success of certification in ecotourism lies in the ability to
demonstrate tangible results and continuously improving the sustainability criteria in line
with tourism development and sustainability issues. Achieving these objectives involves
developing a set of indicators based on results or performance, to provide tangible
information in order to increase credibility and value of certification.
1. Certification - conceptual clarifications
For those who do their utmost to meet the ecoturistic standards, the companies that
misemploy the ecotourism term are a disloyal competition, that jeopardizes the credibility
of the entire industry. A good solution to identify the business that truly practices ecotourism or any other form of sustainable tourism, is certification. This is a way of certifying
that an activity or a product meets certain standards.
Certification is defined as a voluntary process that evaluates, audits and provides written
assurances that a facility, a product, process or service achieves specific standards. A
commercial logo is being offered for those who meet or exceed basic standards (Honey,
2002). Certification is one of the tools that motivates tourism businesses to improve their
economic, social and environmental performances, while being rewarded, in tangible or
intangible way, for these achievements.
Certification in tourism services and especially in the ecoturistic field must achieve some
very important issues including:
• It has to play an educational role;

businesses that promote new technologies;
• Certification is an effective marketing tool, because consumers are trained to
recognize credible brands with a certain notoriety. Thus, eco-certification is a sinequa-non condition in the selection, promotion and conservation of eco-destination
(Hornoiu and Zamfir 2008).
• certification leads both to the increase of the industry standards concerning health,
safety, environmental, social stability and also the reduce of the environmental
protection costs, by ptotecting the environment and limiting the negative impact on
it, by protecting the culture and the local socio-human values ( Tuclea and others,
2008);
From what was mentioned above, one can notice the importance of touristic services
certification and the impact / influence it has on the economic and social environment, but
also on the natural framework. The chances offered by the certification are very broad,
offering a series of benefits for the local communities and for the tour operators in areas
that implement such a system.
2. Global certification systems
Among the first tourism certification systems, located in the XX th century, that measured
the quality of the tourisitc product (usually food and accommodation) but also some aspects
like health, hygiene and safety, there are included: The American Motoring Association
System (AAA) , The Mobile Five Stars in the United States, the Michelin Guide in Europe
and The Five Stars certifying quality hotels.
During the past years, the negative impact of tourism on the environment manifested
globally, a good part of destinations losing their position on the market. Consequently, most
of the stakeholders involved in tourism, started promoting the three dimensions of
sustainable development, indicating them as best practices. According to these objectives,
by focusing the touristic certifications systems on quality, health, hygiene, safety and on the
three dimensions of sustainable development (environmental, socio-cultural and economic)
the growth of the satisfaction of tourists has being seeked after. According to the World
Tourism Organization assessments, there are now over 80 certification programs and
sustainable tourism certification worldwide, that includes aspects regarding the impact of
tourism on economic and socio-cultural environment. Most of the programs assess
accommodation, and only a few certify divisions and other aspects of the tourism industry.
Among the most important systems of certification of quality tourist services are the
following systems:
• Blue Flag is an exclusive ecolabel awarded to beaches and ports that meet certain
requirements in areas like : education and environmental information - warning in
cases of pollution, information on sensitive natural areas, at least five environmental
education activities on the beach etc..; Water quality - compliance with EU Directive
on bathing water, there must be no discharge of wastewater into the beach area,
New Zealand received this certificate in 2007.
• European Union Ecolabel (European Flower) certified tourist accommodation
services and spaces for camping in the European Union and other European
countries. Website contains useful information for the interested companies,
including a self-control tool.
Besides all these, there are a number of certification systems for Africa, America, Asia and
the Pacific area. They put a multitude of forms of organization. To summarize them, the
situation worldwide is as it follows. There are 8 certification systems internationally
accepted (EMAS - Eco-management and audit scheme, Green Globe, ISO 14001, Ecofriendly hotels worldwide, Ecotel, Audubon Cooperative Sanctuary System, Audubon
Signature Cooperative Program, the Blue Flag. Besides these certification systems, there
are 50 other certification programs with a regional or national impact. In an analysis of
forms of organization and leadership, the graphs below are eloquent to see the importance
of certification programs among the tourist profile organizations.
Numar de organizatii implicate in elaborarea
programelor de certificare pe tipurile acestora

Structura sistemelor de certificare dupa
aria de actiune
16%

International
Regional

84%

Fig. 1 System certification structure after area of

20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

19
15

8

Autoritate
publica

8

Asociere

Privat

ONG

Numar organizatii

Fig. 2 System of certification number

action

by type of organisation

Source: based on information colected by the authors, 2006-2008

From the above graphs one can notice the more regional nature of these certification
programs. This signifies a very fragmented activity, difficult to unify into a coherent
program, applicable to a particular touristic sector or to a certain component of the touristic
activity. From Fig. no. 2 note the involvement of various types of organizations in
developing certification programs, with an almost equal share of those developed by NGOs
and public authorities. This means a certain level of interest from governments for the
touristic activity and a permanent concern to improve it. Programs conducted in association
are lower because the number of problems arising in any association between two entities,
often with different interests - the public and private environment. A small number of
certification programs were conducted in private because of the reduced possibilities of
3. The typology of certification programs
The complexity of tourism is reflected in the existence of certification systems and in their
different ways. However, most of them have some similar components, such as: voluntary
implementation, the existence of clearly defined standards and criteria, evaluation,
recognition and granting the use of a logo, a regular audit for the renewal of certification,
continuous improvement, transparency and the existence of participatory mechanisms to
define standards.
The technical aspects of ensuring fairness and objectivity of the certification system can be
very complicated. There are a variety of definitions and rules that are accepted by most
certifying authority, among which:
• Non-Discrimination - the certification must be accessible to all applicants who meet
standards;
• The certifying authority must make decisions and make fair assessments based on
clearly defined criteria;
• the Certifying organization should allow participation of all parties involved in the
work to be assessed, in accordance with the content and the operation of the
certification system;
• The person who assesses a business or activity for certification must be different
from the entity that decided to grant certification and both should be independent of
that which gives advice to business qualification for certification;
• The certifying authority should not be influenced in its decisions by various trade
and financial pressures;
• The certifying authority should mention, as an important contractual clause, reapplying for certification after a certain period of time, as a measure of protection
against the practice of "greenwashing"
• Developing procedures to revoke certification for review and change of the criteria.
The important differences between the certification programs covers: the parties involved in
the verification process, the certification system based on process versus performance,
minimum standards certification versus ecolabel; multiple levels against accepted / rejected.
Certification presents itself in other forms of manifestation; among them, we should
mention the process certification in a company and the performance certification of such a
firm. Thus, the most significant process certification systems within a company are ISO
9000 and ISO 14001. These systems must show continuous improvement processes from
one year to another by comparing their performance. Thus, two hotels can be certified ISO
14001, even if one has an excellent system of water conservation and the other may have a
bad use of it, as long as they show their performance improvement from one year to
another. This is a fundamental problem of the system based on the certification process: a
company may be certified if it has a mechanism to ensure that the management system is
improving constantly in relation with itself. In other words, the company receives a
certification of the efforts and not of its actual performance. Consequence of these effects,
The performance based system certify whether a company or activity is consistent with
some objective criteria of a particular standard. In this way, it allows direct comparison
between two companies, specifying which one has a better environmental performance. In
most cases, certification schemes based on the results match small and medium enterprises,
which amount to 80-90% of business travel worldwide. These systems requires much lower
implementation costs than ISO14001 standard; they include environmental, economic and
socio-cultural criteria, involving a diversity of stakeholders; they may grant logos that
reflect different levels of performance.
4. ECOROM Indicators System
This system of indicators (ECOROM), proposed by the authors, was conducted in several
stages, based on a detailed research - carried out between 2006-2008, and the global
existing certification. Its importance derives from the usefulness of these indicators for
traders who are interested in monitoring economic and performance activity, profits growth
and general level of satisfaction of clients. Also, this system of indicators can be used by
local authorities to measure and act accordingly in order to minimize socio-cultural damage
and maximize economic benefits of the local communities.
At the general level of national tourist destinations, the implementation of this system of
indicators, in the first place, and the necessary measures to bring results at a optimum
level, secondly, help to increase the quality of the services and the level of customer
satisfaction. This way they ensure the premises of sustainable development of tourist
destinations in accordance with the principles of ecotourism.
In the first stage the authors have defined 60 potential indicators, most of them common in
the 38 systems of certification programs in tourism that were analysed. They were
classified into primary and secondary, based on six key issues (environmental, economic,
socio-cultural, quality, staff training, information for visitors and safety, health and
security).
In the second stage, the list was reduced to 30 indicators, using SMART methodology
selection. Thus, a certain amount of potential indicators have not met one or more SMART
test criteria (Specific, Mesurable, Achievable, Reliable, Time-bound), which means that the
indicator should be: specific - it is connected to a single objective, and stakeholders should
consider it representative; measurable - data on this are available and can be used to
measure changes; achievable - measurements and deadlines, turned into costs, are set
realistically; sure - the same conclusions will result if the measurements are made by
different people in similar circumstances; measurable in time.
In the last stage was developed the final set of indicators based on performance. This
selection was consistent with the conceptual framework of tourism and criteria such as:
selection of indicators which measure results at the expense of the ones based on the
process; chosing, wherever possible, quantitative indicators, quantifiable; identifying
indicators that facilitate comparisons between certification systems and can be integrated
both national and regional level. In view of the current, there was developed a set of 21
information on various aspects of certification in ecotourism field, useful information to
measure the phenomenon and its effects, to anticipate evolution trends on this field. In
conjunction with these elements, but also with the side of business that it reflects, the
proposed indicators are presented in a wide range:
- Primary indicators - measuring environmental, social and economic key aspects;
- Secondary indicators - measuring what matters and strengthen the primary ones;
The performance indicators proposed are first of all quantitative because they are easier to
compare between different certification programs for ecotourism. Most indicators have
been proposed based on results, with few exceptions - issues that require complicated
measuring use of expensive foreign experts - They have preferred indicators based on
processes.
Final list of result-based indicators

Table 1
Objective Criteria Type Indicator
A. MINIMIZING ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE
1. Reducing the quantity of solid waste
A1
P1 Kilograms of waste/tourist day or tourist
A1
S1 Percent of total waste which is reused and/or recycled
2. Minimizing contamination through waste elimination
A2
P2 Kilograms of chemical products used/tourist day or tourist
A2
S2 Percent of biodegradable products used in total chemical products
A2
S3 Elimination of solid waste
3. Energy saving
A3
P3 Total energy consumed/tourist day or tourist
A3
S4 Percent of renewable energy in total energy
A3
S5 Total CO2 offset from total CO2 output.
4. Water saving
A4
P4 Total volume of drinking water consumed/tourist day or tourist
A4
S6 Residual water is treated accordingly
B. MINIMIZING SOCIAL AND CULTURAL DAMAGE
5. Behavior code
B5 P5 The behavior code is integrated in management operations
6. Contributing to the development of local community
B6 P6 Percent of income from yearly contributions of total yearly income
B6 S7 Newly established businesses and/or promoted personnel
7. Stakeholder Consultation
B7 P7 Dialogue and consultation with local community and other stakeholders

9. Purchase of local goods and services
C9 P9 Percent of purchase of local goods and services in total purchases
D: OPERATIONAL AND QUALITY MANAGEMENT
10. Integrating ecoturism in management operations
D10 P10 Company ecotourism policy
D10 S9 Management systems regarding ecotourism principles
D10 S10 Good ecotourism practices implemented by the personnel
11. Maximizing ecoturist satisfaction
D11 P11 Ecoturist satisfaction
Source: drafted by the authors, 2008
The development of the indicators, their diversity are subject to availability of primary
sources of data collection, the methods and suitable working techniques. The proposed
indicators are calculated using an integrated group of statistical information, which provide
comparable, reliable and consistent data. Thus, there were especially used simple indicators
or base indicators, that have been obtained starting directly from the statistical series which
are formulated as average, percentage structure, frequency, etc.. and also synthetic or
processed indicators - they relate to global aspects and include elements integrated on the
factors that generate the phenomenon followed - starting from a series of data on which we
can apply more complex methods of processing.
Conclusions
As shown, more and more countries are concerned with the development and
implementation of certification programs, the establishment of criteria and indicators to
ensure an assessment of performances and results in this field, in order to establish
minimum levels of requirements for recognition as a various touristic and ecoturistic
activities. The results of this research are distinguished in comparison with previous
theories and research, highlighting their importance for knowledge and practical
applicability in the future through a proposed standard framework for the collection and use
of data necessary to compile the indicators ECOROM which will harmonize the systems of
certification in ecotourism, thereby providing opportunities for comparison between them.
The examination of the achievements in the field, showed that, although remarkable
progress has been made, there is still room for assuring the comparability of assessment
systems and for the preparation of a representative set of indicators, simple, easy to use,
which can allow the determination and improvement of performance, contributing to final
analysis, defining the objectives of ecotourism and its constant conformation to changing
environmental conditions.

program, Analele Universit ii din Oradea, tiin e Economice, TOM XVII, 2008,
Volumul IV Management and Marketing, Oradea, 2008, p.285
3. Hornoiu Remus Ion, Assessment system of sustainable tourism and ecotourism
certification programs through results-based indicators, Vienna University of
Technology, Department for Interchangeable Manufacturing and Industrial Metrology,
Vienna, Austria, 2008
4. Nistoreanu P., Ecotourism and rural tourism. Bucharest: Publisher ASE, 2003
5. Tuclea C., Padurean M., Hornoiu R., A certification system for ecotourism services in
Romania, Encuentros 2nd Days of Touristica, Portoroz, New Europe- New Tourist
Destination, Turistica College of Tourism, 2008
6. www.blueflag.org/
7. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecolabel/index_en.htm

