
1 Introduction
Businesses nowadays function in an increasingly challenging environment [2] which is reﬂected in increasing
product complexity in manufacturing industries, driven by
customer demand for individualisation. In addition, cost
pressures remain high. The automotive industry has already
been facing this challenge for several years. It can therefore


be seen as a good research base in the supply chain, as well
as in logistics contexts. Efﬁcient manufacturing and
logistics processes are a key competitive advantage, next to
the capability of supplying the right product to the customer with an optimum lead time.
Responding to these challenges extends logistics processes’ scope beyond the formerly known tasks [1]. Space
limitations at the assembly line lead to the picking and
sequencing of parts, a core logistics activity nowadays.
With an increased focus on the trade-off between stock
reduction and higher delivery frequencies, the number of
parts delivered by just-in-sequence processes is also rising.
At all times, on-time parts availability at the assembly line
is essential to ensure high manufacturing capacity
utilisation.
Further improving logistics efﬁciency and effectiveness
requires transparency of the current processes. A proper
PMS is seen as a key for creating transparency and a trigger
for improvement ideas as you cannot improve that which
does not get measured [3]. In addition, ensuring the PMS is
in line with the company’s strategy will enhance strategy
fulﬁlment by lower level management and therefore additionally lead to increased strategy achievement [2]. As
competition is shifting from single companies towards
supply chains, the scope of PMS needs to be extended to
incorporate a supply chain perspective. Supply chain PMS,
if implemented correctly, has already proved its potential
[4, 5]. In the automotive logistics context, a research gap in
respect of the logistics PMS which integrates the supply
chain perspective, while being speciﬁc enough for practitioners to be useful, can be identiﬁed [6, 7].
The latest trends in automotive logistics further
emphasise the requirement to rethink logistics PMS [8].
The trend of outsourcing will, for example, also require a
holistic measurement of performance [9] and provide a
rationale for focusing on logistics performance measurement [10], too, due to the increasing relevance of logistics.
Latest changes on a process level are adding to this as
production concepts are transformed from mass production
to lean production. In the transition to a lean environment,
based on continuous improvement and standardisation of
the improved concepts, a PMS allowing the comparison of
different concepts becomes even more important [11]. The
need to adapt PMS in this context is highlighted in the
literature, but not yet thoroughly researched [12]. To support continuous improvement of the newly implemented
lean production and logistics processes, PM needs to be
aligned with those concepts [13] and needs to support the
identiﬁcation of improvement potentials [11].
Considering both, the mentioned research gap in PMS
for the supply chain and the latest changes in the process
landscape in automotive logistics, the research question
arises: How should a suitable PMS for automotive logistics





be designed? Addressing this question needs to consider
the requirements for PMS resulting from latest literature,
from the processes and logistics concepts as well as user
requirements towards PMS.
We focus our research on automotive logistics, as the
automotive industry is advanced in terms of supply chain
management and lean logistics and therefore offers a good
research base [7]. Our suggested methodology is a multimethod approach. Firstly, a structured literature review on
the current state of PMS in (automotive) logistics context is
provided. As we were not able to identify an approach
which satisﬁes today’s industrial needs and challenges, we
propose a PMS in the context of lean logistics. The
development follows a typical development approach in
PMS research which is modiﬁed to account for the identiﬁed research gaps. Our development process includes the
latest developments in industry regarding logistics processes and the supply chain perspective—from the supplier
to the ﬁnal assembly line. For evaluation purposes, a short
case study on the application of the proposed PMS within
the automotive industry at two sites of a German OEM is
provided, applying the case-study methodology. We
describe the methodologies for PMS development and
evaluation in detail in Sect. 3 of this paper, after the presentation of our ﬁndings from the literature review. Figure 1 highlights the methodologies applied throughout the
paper and their contribution to the research question.

2 Literature review
The following part summarises our ﬁndings from a structured literature review on PMS in an automotive logistics
context. We focus on the design of PMS and speciﬁc PMS
frameworks proposed in a logistics context. As lean production systems have dominated in the automotive industry
since the introduction of the Toyota Production System
[14], we have also included lean manufacturing and lean
logistics-related PMS.
Firstly, we summarise our literature review on the
design criteria for PMS and specify the results for an
automotive logistics context. Secondly, we discuss a
selection of identiﬁed PMSs and their evaluation in respect
of the aforementioned criteria.
2.1 Design criteria for PMS
Conducting a paper search in scholarly databases regarding
research on the design criteria for PMS, especially in a
logistics or supply chain context, highlights that the literature published over the last few years is vast. Reviewing
the papers leads us to conclude that the design criteria

11

Fig. 1 Overview on
methodologies applied
throughout the paper

due to a speciﬁc research focus, e.g. an industry or a local
area, but are similar in their core intent. We therefore only
present a short summary of the main ﬁndings we deem
relevant in an automotive logistics context.
As mentioned before, a supply chain or inter-organisational perspective, needs to be included in PMS today
[1, 15, 16], especially for the area of logistics whose
function is the provision of the physical link between
companies within the supply chain. As the automotive
industry is said to be advanced in supply chain topics, and
is faced with increasing levels of outsourcing, this aspect
further increases in importance. This is also emphasised by
the lean logistics context, which requires a focus on the
value chain instead of ending with company borders—with
a lean supply chain being the ultimate goal [11].
In addition, process orientation is a key [10, 17] to
identifying optimisation potentials along the processes,
with the customer’s requirements [18] being the trigger for
every improvement. Furthermore, by applying process
orientation, an optimisation within functional silos is
avoided, a potential risk of PMS designed without a process perspective.
The inclusion of a balanced set of non-ﬁnancial and
ﬁnancial metrics [19, 20, 21], leads to a holistic assessment, directed towards long-term improvements instead of,
for example, short-term ﬁnancial ones. The PMS should be
orientated towards increasing the efﬁciency and effectiveness of actions [12, 22] alike.
Moreover, the PMS’s design should always consider the
beneﬁt created by the PMS. Deﬁning a value-adding PMS
is essential. This also involves designing a PMS which
supports continuous improvement initiatives [23]. This is
in line with the principles of lean management, which
demand ongoing improvement initiatives (jap. kaizen)
[14, 24]. A properly designed PMS is required to highlight
improvement potentials. Process orientation needs to be

further detailed by a focus on actionable KPIs, and
designed based on cause-and-effect relationships [12, 25].
The right trade-off between detailed KPIs for single process steps and more high level KPIs covering the whole
process is important. In addition to monitoring the material
ﬂow, especially in lean logistics environments, a monitoring of information process KPIs is perceived as signiﬁcant
[11], as the importance of information processes is rising,
e.g. with decreasing stock levels.
For a continuously applied PMS, its efﬁciency for
constantly managing the KPIs is also an important criterion
[26] which may be difﬁcult to evaluate upfront, but which
should be accounted for, e.g. by a focused selection of
required metrics, and a focus on metrics that can be
updated automatically using data in the IT systems.
While evaluating the PMS in the literature, one needs to
remember that designing a PMS which fulﬁls all the design
criteria remains a vision [15]—the criteria therefore have to
be prioritised considering the application context, as indicated before.
2.2 Evaluation of performance measurement
systems from the literature
In the following, we summarise our literature review on
logistics PMS, with special attention on lean logistics. The
approaches are evaluated using the design criteria mentioned before.
We applied a structured paper search to identify relevant
PMS approaches. Keywords for our search included lean,
logistics, performance and measurement according to our
research objective [27]. Using scholarly databases, we
identiﬁed a limited number of papers which complied with
our search criteria, the majority of them having been
published since 2010, indicating a recent resurgence of
research interest in the ﬁeld.


A majority of the identiﬁed papers relate to lean manufacturing which highlights the lack of lean logistics PMS
research. Considering this, we extended our search to
logistics performance measurement literature published
before the introduction of lean logistics, to account for the
main developments in logistics performance measurement
over the last decades.
As representative PMS approaches published before the
introduction of lean, we selected those by Bentz [28] and
Syska [29]. The approach proposed by Bentz [28] can be
characterised as a framework for manufacturing enterprises
with a focus on material ﬂow, mainly evaluating the
ﬁnancial perspective. The deﬁnition of performance indicators is based on selected cost drivers within the material
ﬂow (e.g. available logistics space as a driver for warehousing costs). While mainly cost-focused, the resulting
indicators are partially linked to provide a perspective on
the logistics’ overall efﬁciency. Nevertheless, the proposed
system is solely internally focused and only applicable for
one company or manufacturing site.
The PMS of Syska [29] is based on a system of systematically linked logistics targets, focusing only on
internal logistics processes. In addition, the approach
considers the material ﬂow, but, does not provide a perspective on the information ﬂow. The objective of reduced
logistics costs and increased parts availability are set as
dominant targets for the proposed PMS. Increasing parts
availability focuses on lead-time reduction and other,
mainly manufacturing-related, measures. The author also
highlights the need for a reduction in the handling time
between manufacturing steps, but does not include this
aspect in the PMS. Therefore, logistics aspects are not
covered holistically. This is due to the aspect of the handling time being linked to planning and information ﬂow in
Syska’s argument which is outside the scope of the
approach. Lead times within logistics are only included
when it comes to distribution processes. The aspect of cost
monitoring includes all costs occurring within logistics and
manufacturing, from personnel costs to machine set-up
costs. Summarising the discussion, the proposed approach
includes a detailed set of metrics along the logistics and
manufacturing processes, but is internally focused, thus
missing some important logistics process metrics; it
therefore does not provide a holistic perspective.
In contrast to those two approaches, latest research
includes a lean manufacturing and logistics perspective
considering the currently dominant production concept
[30].
Based on the main research question, clustering the
remaining search results in respect of PMS leads us to
deﬁne three clusters of work. The ﬁrst group focuses on an
assessment of the implementation of lean principles. The
second assesses the performance of a production system





which applies lean manufacturing principles. A third
cluster consists of papers evaluating the extent to which a
different degree of lean implementation leads to various
efﬁciency levels in the manufacturing process. We provide
a short evaluation of the proposed PMS within each cluster
with regards to our research objective in the following:
The ﬁrst cluster of research is mainly based on qualitative, questionnaire-based assessment. The authors derive
questionnaires from lean principles and the assessment
focuses on the extent of the lean-compliance of the applied
manufacturing system. Soriano-Meier and Forester [31]
offer an approach to also compare the degree of lean
implementation among companies as they calculate an
¨
overall score. In contrast, Karlsson and Ahlstrom [30]
assess lean implementation by analysing the determinants
of lean production, e.g. reduction in waste by decreasing
lot sizes. They apply metrics to reﬂect the implementation
and point out an overall direction for each metric (increase
and decrease).
Those approaches show a high level of operational
applicability and are highly process-focused. Furthermore,
they point out improvement directions, thus enabling
continuous improvement. This leads to added value for the
user, insofar as there is agreement that a higher degree of
lean implementation is beneﬁcial to business. In contrast,
these approaches lack integration or linkage into an overarching PMS and can be seen as stand-alone tools (e.g. no
transparency on the implication of improved ‘‘leanness’’
for overall proﬁtability is provided). Furthermore, a frequent evaluation is time consuming due to the qualitative
nature of the assessment. In addition, the evaluations only
show a subjective character as, to some extent, they reﬂect
the opinion of the evaluator. A supply chain perspective is
missing with the systems being designed only for a single
company, not for a supply chain.
The second cluster is speciﬁcally designed to evaluate
performance. Based on the SCOR (supply chain operations
reference) model, Arif-Uz-Zaman and Nazmul Ahsan [32]
propose a lean performance evaluation model. Standard
performance metrics suggested within the SCOR approach
are combined with lean performance metrics. The PMS
design follows a fuzzy-approach to align the methodology
with the company’s strategy. Behrouzi et al. [13] propose a
limited set of performance indicators for the lean supply
chain environment based on expert opinions and a principal
component analysis. Moreover, they apply the clustering of
metrics towards shared objectives (e.g. quality improvement). While offering a selection of possible metrics, the
authors do not elaborate on the selection of critical metrics
in terms of lean assessment.
A second stream of research is based on value stream
redesign processes, rather than measuring overall performance. Wan et al. [34] propose to combine data envelopment analysis (DEA) and VSM to calculate an aggregated
leanness score based on the target fulﬁlment of the
dimensions of cost, time and added value. The quality
dimension is seen to be reﬂected in those dimensions.
Generally, the approaches based on VSM lack a holistic
view as they only focus on one single value stream and can
thus be considered as a standalone tool, rather than a
continuous monitoring tool. Wan et al. [34] address this
aspect by providing an outlook for a continuous application, but also highlight the remaining challenges for an
evaluation of multiple value stream environments, as well
as difﬁculties for users in the identiﬁcation of improvement
ideas. In addition, an integration into a companywide PMS
remains unanswered.
Today, research on the correlation of the degree of lean
implementation and actual performance improvements
focuses on selected lean principles and their realisation.
Agus and Hajinoor [24] assess the link between lean
principles and ﬁnancial performance. They focus on the
link between lean manufacturing and business performance, also accounting for quality performance. Based on
an empirical survey, selected aspects are presented to be
monitored within a lean supply chain PMS. The work
conﬁrms that several lean principles, e.g. the reduction in
set-up times, continuous improvement programmes,

Page 5 of 26

11

realisation of the pull principle, the shortening of lead
times, as well as smaller lot sizes, show a positive inﬂuence
on product quality performance [24]. Fullerton and Wempe
[35] indicate the need for non-ﬁnancial metrics and the
involvement of shop-ﬂoor employees in the overall lean
implementation process, with the link between non-ﬁnancial metrics, the overall management accounting system
and continuous improvement processes indicating the need
for further research.
Other researchers propose a selection of metrics for lean
performance evaluation along the implementation journey
and bear in mind the criticism that current PMS, in the
context of lean introduction, is too static. They mainly
focus on the added value time, defects and productivity. An
application, in the context of a continuous improvement
cycle, is suggested [36]. Whilst these approaches show
strengths regarding applicability during implementation,
they are not designed for continuous monitoring and integration into companywide monitoring systems.
Figure 2 summarises the discussion using selected
design criteria (see Sect. 2.1).
2.3 Identiﬁcation of research needs
Our literature review identiﬁed initial approaches to evaluate performance within a lean context. However, within
these approaches, we could not identify an approach that
ﬁts the stated requirements of quantifying the performance

Fig. 2 Evaluation of the literature




Fig. 3 Summary of
requirements for an automotive
logistics PMS in the context of
lean logistics

of the automotive supply chain including the elements of
lean logistics. Most approaches are lean manufacturingrelated and do not consider logistics. In the context that
current research emphasises the importance of performance
evaluation during lean implementation [36], and considering the fact that automotive logistics currently is in the
transition phase to lean logistics, this becomes even more
important. A lack of understanding of lean performance
due to the unavailability of adequate PMS support is found
to be a driver for a failing lean implementation [13] and the
non-acceptance of those concepts in industry.
As lean implementation is seen as an ongoing, continuous process; a proper PMS does not only need to account
for the start of implementation, but also needs to be aligned
with a company or manufacturing PMS and support the
transition journey to lean. This has not yet been considered
broadly in the literature, nor has it been rolled-out to
logistics PMS.
Being aligned with the overarching company’s PMS and
objectives is important, as lean implementation is not the
only objective [37]. A ﬁrst notion is provided by Monden
[38], who links lean assessments and strategic objectives,
but remains unspeciﬁc on the required set of performance
indicators for the different management levels. In our literature review, we were also not able to identify any
approaches which provide this overall link.
In addition, regarding a holistic assessment, we were not
able to identify any approaches which systematically consider the importance of information processes within
logistics and provide a tool for evaluating information
quality. Current approaches are dominated by subjective
questionnaire-based evaluations (e.g. [39]).
We conclude that PMS, in the context of lean, seem to
be too operationally focused and only measure the lean
implementation. The systems lack an integration of the
company’s objectives, as well as the supply chain



perspective, due to a solely internal focus. This is in contrast to the general approaches in PMS research, which are
considered as being too simplistic, too high level and not
speciﬁc enough [2], as is the supply chain literature [40].
Figure 3 summarises the resulting requirements, taking
the identiﬁed research gaps into account.
Based on the identiﬁed research gap, the remainder of
the paper focuses on the development of a PMS to holistically evaluate logistics performance. In addition, the
approach takes lean logistics principles and their current
application in the automotive industry into account. As the
proposed approach is not solely focused on lean, and
integrates all the relevant objectives within automotive
logistics, we aim to provide researchers and practitioners
with a PMS which is applicable beyond the lean implementation. Furthermore, the proposed PMS includes a
perspective on material and information ﬂow processes to
provide a holistic logistics assessment.
Our approach is designed to be applicable in a supply
chain context and, at the same time, is developed speciﬁcally to be helpful for practitioners, including speciﬁc
performance indicators (PI) across all levels of hierarchy
within the companies. In addition, we aim to derive an
enabling PMS which is focused on triggering improvements and is used by lower management levels and
employees [41] to increase the application of continuous
improvement processes.

3 Methodology
In the following, we describe the methodology used to
develop and evaluate the PMS. We followed a systematic
process described in Sect. 3.1 to develop a PMS applicable
in automotive logistics in line with recommendations in the
approach was selected for this paper as it is seen as one of
the most suitable approaches to present research results in
supply chain and logistics management [42], especially in
applied research [43].
3.1 Development approach and process
The development of our proposed PMS started with a
deﬁnition of the objectives for the PMS’s application [3] in
Sect. 4. For the development of the generic PMS framework, we followed a ﬁve-step process:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Analysis of objectives in automotive logistics.
Development of reference processes within automotive
logistics.
Determination of the relevant performance dimensions
and top-level key performance indicators (KPI).
Detailed breakdown of evaluation aspects along the
logistics process.
Deﬁnition of performance indicators (PI) for selected
evaluation aspects.

With this development process, we followed the
¨
approach proposed by Gopfert [44], in combination with
¨
the one of Syska [29]. Gopfert [44] provides an overall
process for PMS development, while Syska [29] provides
the idea of splitting the process into a generic PMS
development and a customisation phase. In addition, our
process reﬂected the recommendations of several
researchers (e.g. [12, 23, 25, 45, 46]).
Starting with an analysis of the objectives within automotive logistics, we aimed to identify typical objectives in
the current lean logistics environment and beyond. The
analysis provided the base for identifying the relevant
performance dimensions with step three of the proposed
methodology, and provided the link to overall company
and supply chain objectives.
A detailed process analysis in automotive logistics
enabled us to propose a PMS which is based on the
underlying processes. This aspect is also pursued at a
supply chain level by the SCOR model [32, 47], and followed in our approach on a more detailed, speciﬁc process
level. We judged a process orientation important for
enabling continuous improvement. During this step, we
aimed to develop a reference process of the industry as a
base for our PMS deﬁnition.
Using the combination of process analysis and logistics
objectives not only enabled us to break down the objectives
into each process step, but also to identify the relevant
performance dimensions to be included into the PMS. This
served as a starting base for the identiﬁcation of top-level
KPIs, as well as for the breakdown to PIs along each
process step later on to also ensure speciﬁcity [48].



11

When selecting relevant PIs, we focused on cause-andeffect relationships to ensure continuous improvement
support on the lower level while, at the same time, ensuring
beneﬁts added to the increased achievement of the objectives on the higher level metrics.
To ensure practical relevance, all the steps were supported by a broad analysis of publically available company
documents and standards within the automotive industry
(e.g. from the German association of automotive industry),
as well as several interviews with logistics experts and
managers in the automotive industry. By doing so, we
hoped to not only propose a new theoretical framework, but
also to focus on its applicability and added value to the
industry.
After the generic PMS development, one modiﬁcation
step was proposed as in Syska [29], i.e. step six in the
overall development process.
6.

Company-speciﬁc adjustment of the suggested PMS
framework (e.g. weighting of objectives, adaption of
PMS to processes, complement suggested KPIs).

The objective of the last development step of the PMS
was its adjustment to company-speciﬁc objectives, their
processes, required data sources and IT systems. For the
speciﬁc company context, this was an opportunity to
include experience and potentially additional important
KPIs from expert discussions, and to ﬁt the proposed
approach into existing reporting systems.
Using this approach, we accounted for the ﬁnding that
deﬁning a PMS in industry is not only about a greenﬁeld
development of a ‘‘should-be’’ PMS, as is often suggested
in the literature, but also about its integration and the
coordination of existing metrics [49]. By applying quantitative and qualitative methods, e.g. interviews, observation
and participation in meetings, action research, review of
company documents and publications, an applicable and
enabling PMS [50] for the speciﬁc company context was
derived.
3.2 Evaluation methodology
The evaluation methodology was designed to allow an
evaluation of the applicability of the proposed PMS
framework in industry, the assumed objectives, as well
as the processes. In this context, the selection of KPIs
and PIs within our framework was tested applying
qualitative and quantitative methods. Furthermore,
applying the PMS within an automated KPI dashboard
allowed the evaluation of the automatic data evaluation.
In addition, we included an assessment of the usefulness of the system for identifying continuous improvement potentials—one of the main objectives during
development.


Our methodology used elements of an explanatory case
study focusing on the applicability of the proposed PMS. In
addition, it could also be called an exploratory case study
[51] when it came to understanding the metrics used currently within the company, their alignment with the proposed PMS and the integration of the company-speciﬁc
ones into our framework during the implementation step.
We therefore evaluated the framework using a case study at
two manufacturing sites of a German automotive OEM (for
details, see Sect. 5.1).
For evaluation purposes, we used a combination of
workshops across the logistics functions, i.e. interviews,
documents and data analysis. The participants are distributed across all levels of hierarchy, from operative level
up to logistics management of the different sites.
At the beginning, a ﬁrst round of workshops was conducted with the aim of aligning the logistics objectives
found in the literature with the ones used on-site. Based on
that, we proposed an open workshop format to collect the
required PIs from logistics experts within the focus company. The focus was on the transparency of the PIs collected at the time, their relevance according to the experts’
judgements, as well as the additional PIs that were considered relevant for monitoring and improving logistics
processes. In this context, we proposed an open workshop
format, not presenting our framework in detail upfront, so
as to ensure non-biased discussion with the experts.
Afterwards, the clustering and consolidation of all the
PIs identiﬁed in the open workshop rounds was applied.
We compared our proposed PIs with the ones identiﬁed in
the experts’ workshops. PIs which were not named by the
experts, but proposed in our PMS, were highlighted and
discussed in respect of their added value in a follow-up
meeting. Additional PMs deemed relevant from an expert
perspective were added to our proposed framework, as was
the case also in step 6 of the development process in the
case of a typical implementation journey of the PMS. The
resulting PMS draft was aligned in another round of
workshops and additional interviews.
After the modiﬁcation of the detailed deﬁnition of the
PMS and each metric (e.g. alignment with data sources,
adding responsibilities), the system was implemented and
data evaluation started, as well as a dashboard allowing PI
evaluation launched. Based on that, a quantitative evaluation of each metric was started, which also highlighted
initial improvement potentials.
3.3 Scope of the PMS framework
The scope of our logistics PMS framework covers the
whole automotive supply chain, ranging from the suppliers
to the point-of-use within the automotive OEM’s manufacturing site (e.g. the ﬁnal assembly or body-shop line).





For development purposes, we split the automotive
supply chain into supplier—customer relationships at each
stage, e.g. ﬁrst-tier supplier—OEM, second-tier—ﬁrst-tier
supplier. For the remainder of the paper, we concentrate on
the relationship ﬁrst-tier supplier—OEM as, from a lineback perspective, this is the ﬁrst relationship in the chain
starting from the logistics’ customer ‘‘manufacturing line’’.
Furthermore, based on the literature and our experience,
the highest process variety exists in this relationship, which
allows a PMS framework derived based on this relationship
to be transferred to other segments of the chain later on.
Each segment showing the customer–supplier relationship
is analogous to the primary scope of the developed PMS.
By ensuring shared objectives across the supply chain, as
well as aligned, standardised KPIs, we ensure a consistent
PMS across the whole supply chain. This vision offers
opportunities for all the partners to beneﬁt from a shared
PMS which is linked to the objectives of the whole chain,
and suitable for application in a supply chain context [18].
When applying lean logistics principles, the focus is on
the value stream—the process of value creation—instead
of functional silos. The value stream in our context starts
from the manufacturing line, which can be seen as an
interface for translating the voice of the customer to
logistics (e.g. the assembly takt time reﬂects the customer’s
takt, the material demand of the assembly line reﬂects
actual customer orders). Nevertheless, besides a value
stream—and therefore process perspective—our framework has to be designed in such a way that it considers
typical organisational set-ups within the logistics function
of companies within the automotive chain today. This
allows e.g. for the assignment of managers along the process who are responsible for improvements. Resulting from
the discussion that employees should be able to improve
the PIs against which they are monitored, we judge this
aspect important and as a trade-off between purely process
oriented design and the traditional functional silos.

4 Performance measurement system
for the automotive logistics chain
The following section summarises the main results of the
PMS development process. While presenting the full scope
for the ﬁrst stages of the methodology, we focus on
inbound logistics processes for the demonstration of
speciﬁc KPIs from step 2 until the end of the case study1
due to the length limitations of this paper.
In terms of our focus, we assumed it valid to concentrate
on the OEM and the link to the ﬁrst-tier supplier. By doing
1

Similar results are available upon request from the authors for the
within an automotive supply chain which is found in supply chain research [9]. Nevertheless, the roll-out to the
whole chain needs to be kept in mind to create a valid and
holistic PMS structure. This is in line with our objective of
a linked PMS and its stepwise roll-out to the partners
within one supply chain, e.g. to Tier 1 suppliers and
logistics service providers.
4.1 Analysis of logistics objectives
Several authors report on logistics objectives, but only a
limited number on speciﬁcs within the automotive industry
can be found in publicly available sources. It is mainly
world-class operations which can be found as an overarching target for manufacturing and logistics, including
high-quality processes throughout the company [10].
Broken down to logistics, typical objectives are the
achievement of cost advantages and the realisation of service leadership to realise price premiums. For logistics, this
is reﬂected in the dimensions of increased productivity,
quality and customer satisfaction [18]. Productivity
includes capital investment optimisation (e.g. for logistics
equipment and buildings) and the reduction in operational
expenses (e.g. personnel costs in warehousing, transportation costs)—both measured against the throughput of the
system. In addition, especially in logistics, optimised
inventory levels are key [10] not only within a company,
but also across the supply chain [52].
Customer satisfaction (in terms of our deﬁnition, the
logistics’ customer manufacturing line) includes the
improvement of customer service, e.g. in terms of lead time
[10] to the level demanded by the customer, and on-time
delivery.
In areas where logistics is closely interlinked to operations, the dimension of ﬂexibility towards changes within
the operations environment also needs to be supported
[17, 53], reﬂecting an additional objective in logistics.
Our analysis of company documents and interviews
highlights how the trade-off between different objectives is
handled with varying priorities in different companies. There
are cultural differences, e.g. Japanese manufacturers focus
more on quality and customer satisfaction, whereas Western
companies tend to emphasise the productivity dimension
ﬁrst. In addition, improvements are orientated more towards
the short term in Europe, in contrast to Japan [17].
Over the last few years, the prioritisation of objectives
has also shifted. The efﬁciency of logistics has become
more important than a cost-only perspective. In addition,
with the introduction of lean logistics, the focus on the
quality of logistics and logistics processes has increased.
This also includes an emphasis on information quality, as a

Page 9 of 26

11

consequence of further reduced inventories, and its
necessity for a stable process.
A typical trade-off that can be found in automotive
logistics is the prioritisation of cost reduction or increased
productivity, as long as on-time delivery and the demanded
logistics quality is maintained [54]. A perspective is followed in the remainder of the paper.
Furthermore, we used the term effectiveness to summarise logistics effort and quality dimension, as effort can
only be measured in context with quality (logistics efforts
not showing the provided quality can be seen as waste in
lean thinking). Effectiveness therefore reﬂects what can be
seen from the customer’s point of view [18]. In addition,
efﬁciency reﬂects the productivity dimension.
Flexibility in automotive logistics in the remainder of
the paper is the capability of maintaining or further
improving the current level of efﬁciency and effectiveness
in the future, also in case of changing inﬂuencing factors
on logistics (e.g. decreasing production volumes).
In addition, our analysis showed the need for ﬂexibility
to add company-speciﬁc objectives, such as green logistics
being derived from the strategy objective of ‘‘green-manufacturing’’ in some companies. As not all companyspeciﬁc objectives can be covered in the generic PMS, the
framework needs to provide ﬂexibility for their integration.
4.2 Process analysis
The following process analysis aims at identifying the main
processes in automotive logistics which need to be reﬂected within our PMS framework. In general, while detailed
processes vary even within companies, the overall structure
and process steps applied are found to be quite similar.
This has also been found in recent works by other
researchers [3], justifying our approach to developing a
generic PMS based on our process analysis—the derived
process shall be named ‘‘reference processes in automotive
logistics’’.
Figure 4 presents an overview of the results of our
analysis with a focus on the inbound logistics processes. To
account for the increasing importance of the information
ﬂow, in addition to the material ﬂow shown in the ﬁgure,
demand forecasting and material call-off processes have
been considered for the following PMS development.
With the introduction of lean production and logistics
throughout recent years, we found that the number of
logistics process variants has increased signiﬁcantly from
the previously dominating concepts of full truck load
(FTL) and area forwarding (AF). For example, crossdocking processes have been introduced, as the inbound
logistics’ reaction to decreased lot sizes and increasing
delivery frequencies, to enable efﬁcient transportation




Fig. 4 Logistics reference processes in inbound logistics, using information in [55, 56]

processes. Milk-run processes are also superior in fulﬁlment of the cost—delivery frequency trade-off.
Nevertheless, those processes did not fully replace former processes, such as AF. Next to the introduction of new
processes, the focus of logistics activities shifted, with
sequencing and picking activities gaining increasing
attention especially in inhouse logistics.
In addition, Fig. 4 points out processes that include a
direct delivery to the point-of-use. These processes
exclude warehousing and parts stocking on-site, like
just-in-time (JiT) or just-in-sequence (JiS) concepts.
The concepts of warehouse-on-wheels and trailer yard,
which can also be found today, only include the
buffering of material during the inbound process,
combined with a direct delivery of material to the
receiving dock, from which its delivery to the ﬁnal
point-of-use takes place.
Analysing the process variants within inbound logistics
justiﬁes the need to cover the whole inbound chain from
supplier to point-of-use when designing a holistic PMS; for
example, comparing a JiS supply to an AF process,
including warehousing and sequencing steps within the inhouse logistics process, requires a perspective of the full
process from supplier to the assembly line.



For processes with indirect delivery, a typical in-house
logistics process includes at least the reception of goods,
truck unloading, warehousing and transportation. In addition, deconsolidation, order picking and sequencing are of
increasing importance.
Considering the complexity within the logistics processes in terms of the number of process variants, we
suggest a segmentation of the whole process into process
modules which can be combined ﬂexibly to represent the
implemented processes on-site. Along with this, we suggest
a similar modularisation for the logistics PMS in automotive logistics, with each module consisting of standardised
performance indicators (Pis) for this respective module
(e.g. the one of a direct transportation process) breaking
down the overall KPIs of the logistics PMS framework.
The idea of modularisation of the inbound processes is
highlighted in Fig. 5 (warehouse-on-wheels and trailer
yard following the material ﬂow of direct delivery), concluding that all inbound process in Fig. 4 can be designed
by either the module of direct transport, milk-run or consolidation/deconsolidation or a combination of those three.
All of the modules are backed up with a detailed value
stream analysis and information ﬂows for detailed process

This approach has been used throughout the remainder
of the paper and detailed in the next sections. By means of
the modularisation, we hope to involve managers and team
leaders of each step in the supply chain to improve their
speciﬁc PIs. We assume this principle to be beneﬁcial in
terms of limiting PIs for each employee, ensuring ﬂexible
applicability and facilitating the link to strategic objectives.
Furthermore, it enables a standardisation of logistics PIs
on at least a process step level and therefore can be used for
comparison and benchmarking along the whole process of
automotive logistics across companies.
4.3 Overall PMS structure and top-level KPIs
The suggested PMS structure follows the objectives identiﬁed in Sect. 4.2 and the aspect of allowing modularisation
of the PMS which is derived from the process perspective.
To allow modularisation and aligned PIs on a process level,
the following section deﬁnes the structure and top-level
KPIs.
Reﬂecting upon the analysis of objectives in automotive
logistics, the need for a balanced model, e.g. a balanced
score card [19], as a general framework has been emphasised. In each of the dimensions, we suggest to follow what
Cagnazzo et al. [18] deﬁne as the hierarchical model. To
increase speciﬁcity, we focused on deﬁning a system of
speciﬁc KPIs to provide the base for the PIs’ deﬁnition
behind each of the suggested dimensions down to process
level.
As dimension of the KPIs, especially the cost and effort
related KPIs, we followed the opinion of Gunasekaran
et al. [10] that the leading dimension should be the ﬁnal
product delivered to the customer. As the ultimate goal is
to deliver a vehicle to the customer, the produced vehicle is
our proposed base for all the metrics calculation at top
level (e.g. logistics costs per vehicle).
The main dimensions for our framework were efﬁciency, quality of logistics processes and a lean dimension
to combine the objectives of logistic and the demand for
transparency on lean logistics principles’ fulﬁlment,

Page 11 of 26

11

resulting from lean ongoing implementations. Logistics
efforts and costs were monitored next to resource utilisation within logistics efﬁciency, and expressed as relative
costs by a composite measure [45] to facilitate
interpretation.
We suggest naming the quality dimension ‘‘perfection’’
in line with the demand to strive for perfection throughout
all the processes found in lean logistics literature. It
includes all the logistics quality-related metrics, including
material and information ﬂow.
The lean dimension includes the lean principles, namely
the ﬂow, takt and pull principles. We see the takt and pull
principles’ fulﬁlment adding to an increased ﬂow within
logistics—when standing next to each other, the close link
between the three principles therefore led us to suggest
their integrated monitoring.
In addition, we proposed a dimension of external factors, highlighting aspects which impact upon the primary
logistics PIs, but cannot be directly inﬂuenced by logistics.
One example of external factors is turbulences within the
production sequence, requiring resequencing of parts in
logistics; a PI measuring stability of production sequence is
therefore seen as a key indicator to assess this inﬂuence, to
facilitate interpretation and comparison of logistics PIs
over time, between different sites of a company or across
companies.
Figure 6 provides an overview of the proposed
dimensions.
As a next step, a line-back analysis was conducted to
assign PIs for each of the process modules. By doing so,
only PIs were selected which are relevant for each single
module. Relevance is decided by the question of whether
the single module has an inﬂuence on achieving a higher
performance in the overarching context of this PI. For
example, reﬂecting the right quantity of parts within one
shipment is relevant during the reception of goods where it
is suggested as a PI. Line-back, during truck registration,

Fig. 6 Structure of the proposed PMS




the correct quantity of parts within a single shipment can
neither be inﬂuenced, nor checked: this PI is therefore not
monitored for truck registration. On the other hand, following the process further line-back, this PI is again suggested for the supplier. This allows assigning to each
process module only PIs that can be inﬂuenced and avoids
overloading responsibles with PIs.
For the dimension of logistics efﬁciency, the total set of
PMs includes cost KPIs, monitoring of logistics efforts and,
to increase applicability in identifying improvement
potentials, also a monitoring of capacity utilisation (e.g.
transport capacity utilisation, warehouse space utilisation),
which is seen as the most important indicator for the
identiﬁcation of improvement options.
Cost monitoring focuses on a holistic cost assessment.
The process analysis is therefore used to identify all the
costs occurring in each single process step, e.g. monitoring
the costs for inbound transportation includes transportation
costs. In addition, overhead costs related to transport (e.g.
network planning, timetable alignment) need to be included to ensure comparability of the processes.
The requirement of a holistic cost assessment is of
increasing importance as, in today’s processes, roles are
shifting, e.g. from LSPs to OEMs, should area forwarding be replaced by cross-docking. In cross-docking
processes, the OEM is responsible for network planning
and timetable alignment, a task formerly done by the
LSP and included indirectly within the LSP’s transportation costs.
The same is applied for ‘‘perfection’’, starting with a
deﬁnition of the customer’s requirement in terms of

Correct information in this context includes, e.g. the
accuracy of the demand forecast, the quality of labelling or
the right information used for call-offs from the line.
Within the lean dimension, the main objective is an
increased ﬂow of the material. Therefore, as it is relevant
for all process modules, a ﬂow metric for logistics was
deﬁned, making waste in terms of waiting time transparent.
In addition, the takt and pull principle were evaluated lineback, where takt evaluates whether logistics processes are
in line with the manufacturing line’s takt (or a multiple
thereof) and pull evaluates the call-off principle line-back.
Again, PIs were selected by relevance for each logistics
module (e.g. no takt or pull can be monitored for truck
registration).
Furthermore, we suggest a monitoring of implementation of lean to facilitate the implementation process and to
create a PMS applicable from the start of lean implementation by also applying a qualitative questionnaire, e.g. as
proposed in [30], as part of the lean dimension for the
overall inbound and inhouse logistics process as well as for
the overall process from supplier to OEM. By doing so, we
link the whole PMS to an implementation monitoring and
enable an evaluation of the beneﬁts of lean
implementation.

•
•

•

•
•
•

the right part
at the right time (e.g. the assembly takt where the part is
needed reﬂects the deadline)
in the right quality
in the right location
in the right packaging (the packaging itself, if any, and
in the right tray, e.g. car set tray).

Those customer requirements can be transferred lineback through all of the deﬁned process modules.
In addition, not driven by the customer, but especially
also in terms of lean logistics process quality assessment,
there is the need to assess the fulﬁlment of process standardisation, as well as the information process. In addition,
for ‘‘perfection’’, we suggest PIs to monitor whether the
part is delivered using the right process, and whether the
process is supported by the correct information (e.g. calloffs). We suggested monitoring the correct process in terms
of process compliance with the planned process and, secondly, whether the planned process complies with standard
processes within the company.



4.4 Detailed KPI breakdown along the logistics
process elements
As principles for the selection of the relevant PIs, we
selected the ones proposed by Gunasekaran et al. [10]:
Focusing on

•
•
•
•

the main, highly correlating drivers of performance,
e.g. cost drivers in terms of the monitoring of logistics
costs
aspects that are quantiﬁable
a selected and limited number of KPIs, ‘‘less is more’’
the ones that enable improvements and
the ones which are already available within the
company’s reporting or can be assessed with limited
costs of data collection

Reﬂecting the last aspect in generic terms is challenging,
nevertheless, using our process analysis and basing the
development on industry standards, allowed us to select PIs
at least in line with what should be available.
In the following, the details on each of the monitored
dimensions are provided. Figure 7 summarises the suggested overall KPIs for the automotive logistics chain from
supplier to the point-of-use at the customer. As we are
focusing on inbound logistics in the following, Fig. 8
highlights the relevant KPIs derived from specifying the

11

Fig. 7 Overall KPIs for the proposed PMS

Fig. 8 KPI breakdown to inbound logistics

These KPIs provide the base for the PIs’ deﬁnition for
the inbound process modules. This logic is highlighted in
Fig. 9 for the direct transport module, considering only PIs
which can be inﬂuenced within this module.
The following section summarises the reasoning for the
(K)PI selection. To monitor efﬁciency, all the relevant

costs occurring within each process step are monitored, e.g.
in inbound logistics transportation costs, consolidation
costs and overhead costs (e.g. transportation network
planning). Furthermore, we suggest including a monitoring
of inventories to also cover stocking and buffering functions which are moved from inside the plant to an inbound




Fig. 9 PMs for transportation module inbound logistics for 1:1 transportation

function (e.g. by applying warehouse-on-wheels concepts
with goods receiving only upon unloading). To enable the
interpretation of data, next to cost monitoring, the main
cost drivers from a logistics effort perspective are linked,
e.g. transportation service incl. volume and distance, handled units in consolidation functions. The utilisation of
transport and dock capacity is suggested as a KPI which
facilitates improvements, e.g. transport utilisation below a
certain threshold can be used as a transparent trigger for
alerts, whereas transportation volume is more difﬁcult to
interpret. Furthermore, regarding the logistics effort we
include the number of handlings per shipment being an
indicator of complexity of process and an enabler for
improvements.
Within ‘‘perfection’’, delivery quality monitors the
effectiveness from a customer’s perspective, focusing on
material ﬂow and the question as to whether logistics is
supplying what needs to be supplied. Information quality
focuses on the relevant information for supporting the
inbound logistics process, e.g. the stability of call-offs from
suppliers (which can be seen as prerequisite for on-time
delivery in inbound logistics), or the quality of transportation documents and labellings (which supports the
inbound logistics process and, if incorrect, leads to an
increased workload in goods receiving).
In addition, for an interpretation of improvement
potentials, the knowledge of whether the processes comply
with the planned ones is also required. In industry, this has



two dimensions—ﬁrstly, the question of whether processes
come alive in the way they are planned, and secondly, the
aspect of whether the processes that are planned are in line
with the standard processes developed within a company
and supply chain. Especially in automotive logistics,
characterised by a large number of manufacturing sites per
company, the question arises as to whether the standardised
process can be, and is, followed at all the sites or whether
there are speciﬁcs on-site which hinder the implementation
of standard processes and the speciﬁcity of the standards—
we therefore proposed splitting this aspect into two metrics.
Within the lean dimension, we proposed a ﬂow metric
for logistics to measure the material ﬂow in terms of
logistically added value and required time. For this, the
ﬂow metric is based on the fact that the logistics processes,
if designed correctly, only include activities really required
to fulﬁl customer needs, e.g. bridging the distance between
the supplier and the manufacturer, as well as picking and
sequencing. They can therefore be seen as logistics ‘‘added
value’’ to the fulﬁlment of the customer (manufacturing
line) needs. From the OEMs point of view, an increased
margin can be gained, for instance, by low-cost country
sourcing which is only possible due to logistics. Activities
within logistics can therefore be seen as adding value while
others, e.g. storage, additional transport or quality issues,
are seen as waste. To assess the share of added value time
versus waste, we proposed the transferral of the concept of
bridging the distance between supplier and manufacturing
plant can be seen as adding value as long as the transport
(distance supplier to OEM plant) is carried out with efﬁcient velocity, (e.g. 80 km per hour as a maximum for
truck transport in most countries in the EU). All the other
time required for the inbound processes are losses which
increase the lead time and should be avoided when aiming
for reduced stock levels. Due to this, and for comparability
reasons, we proposed this standardised ﬂow metric as a
KPI. The deﬁnition for the example of an inbound transportation ﬂow metric is provided in the appendix. Next to
ﬂow, the evaluation of lean also considers the takt principle
being transferred to logistics, as well as the pull principle
being implemented for material demand steering and
control.
As indicated in Fig. 8, also the monitoring of the degree
of lean implementation using the qualitative questionnaire
approach is not suggested on the process module level. Due
to the reasoning that the majority of lean logistics principles are deﬁned for a value stream rather than a single
process step, and therefore can only be evaluated in case of
linked modules, an evaluation is only suggested down to
the inbound logistics process level.
As external factors in the context of inbound logistics,
we proposed to monitor, e.g. the average distance to suppliers, handled part numbers on-site, number of suppliers,
production sequence accuracy. Such PIs can assist in the
comparison of the inbound logistics cost between manufacturing sites in different locations, for example.
4.5 Deﬁnition of KPIs using the developed KPI
deﬁnition sheet
As found during the literature review, the beneﬁt of
standardised KPI deﬁnitions is unquestioned. We proposed
a standardised KPI deﬁnition sheet for all the included
metrics to ensure alignment with the interpretation of
metrics among all parties. Objectives of the deﬁnition sheet
for each metric are to ensure the same application of the
(K)PIs throughout the company and supply chain, as well
as the transparency of data sources, the calculation and the
interaction to other metrics. Thanks to this effort in metrics
deﬁnition, we hope to address the current hurdle encountered in many companies that cross-site comparisons and
identiﬁcation of best practices are hindered by the nonstandardised use of (K)PIs [57]. We provided an example
of a KPI deﬁnition sheet for the ﬂow metric of inbound
logistics transport function in the appendix (see Fig. 17).
Due to length limitations, not all the deﬁnition sheets can
be included in this paper.2
2

Additional deﬁnition sheets can be requested from the authors.

Page 15 of 26

11

At this stage, it must be remembered that, beyond a
detailed (K)PI deﬁnition, standardisation also has to
include data sources, measurement points and reporting
channels for a fully comparable PMS. Especially in
logistics, researchers currently report on the limited standardisation of IT systems [58].
4.6 Summary of the proposed PMS
As a result of the development phase we propose a PMS for
automotive logistics, which is broken down from the
logistics objectives to a process module level.
The deﬁnition of logistics objectives accounts for the
multi-dimensional objectives of today’s logistics environment and integrates the lean logistics principles next to
classical logistics objectives. Breaking down the resulting
KPIs into PIs ensures their systematic linkage—from the
strategic down to the operational level.
In addition, the breakdown along process modules
ensures the speciﬁcity needed to enable continuous
improvement. Standardisation is enabled by the modular
approach, allowing to combine standardised PIs of the relevant process modules to reﬂect the whole logistics process
while maintaining comparability of the PIs of each module.
The modular approach therefore accounts for the complex,
differentiated logistics process landscape found in industry
today and facilitates standardisation as far as possible.
Figure 10 summarises the resulting PMS and highlights
the main aspects of the structure. For examples of the metrics
included, please refer to Figs. 7, 8, 9 presented before.

5 Evaluation
The following section evaluates the proposed PMS
approach using a case study at a German OEM covering a
one-year process of modiﬁcation and implementation of
the PMS (step 6 in the overall process) and its evaluation at
two manufacturing sites. The authors were involved in the
PMS modiﬁcation to the company, the implementation
and, based on the ﬁndings, led the evaluation phase.
The following provides a short introduction to the focus
company and the selected sites for the PMS application.
After that, a brief summary of the modiﬁcation of the
proposed PMS and the implementation is provided (see
step 6 of the PMS development process). Section 5.3
describes the evaluation phase in detail.
5.1 Case-study introduction
We selected a large German OEM as focal company for the
evaluation. As described before, selecting an OEM offers
the opportunity for a broad evaluation of the applicability


Fig. 10 Summary of the proposed PMS



complexity.
We selected two manufacturing sites of the OEM. One
of the two selected sites can be considered one of the largest, high-volume assembly sites of the company, the other
represented the smaller plants.
The range of products assembled at the two sites range
from mid-class to luxury, premium vehicles. In total, ﬁve
different models are produced within the two plants. The
plants have implemented the latest manufacturing and
logistics concepts throughout recent years. Those concepts
can be seen as applying lean logistics principles.
Both plants, besides using the same standardised logistics concept, can be described as differing in terms of their
operational processes due to signiﬁcantly different volumes
and the set-ups of production facilities. Nevertheless,
commonalities do exist. Both plants handle their in-house
logistics partially by using an external warehouse, requiring transport to the assembly site after an external goods
receiving, warehousing and some de-consolidation, picking
and sequencing steps. In addition, depending on the
speciﬁc part numbers, those processes can also be handled
internally on-site.
In terms of the regional dimensions, the whole supplier
base is covered, which mainly includes European suppliers.
Therefore, in terms of regionality, the case study can be
described as European according to the supplier locations.
The main transport mode is road transportation, besides
supplies from the company’s other production sites, which
are partially done via railway.
The implementation and evaluation of the PMS took
place within the logistics function of both sites, including
the inbound and in-house logistic responsibilities. We
covered the functions of material planning, material handling, logistics planning, information logistics and logistics
controlling in detail. The whole process, from the suppliers
to the point-of-use, was therefore covered.
Our ﬁndings from the ﬁrst interviews in respect of the
current use of PMS at the two sites conﬁrmed the experience of other researchers, e.g. [49] regarding PMS application in industry today. We found a decentralised
reporting of single performance indicators without a connection to a holistic and structured PMS. Correlations and
links between metrics were not highlighted, nor were they
systematically analysed. The IT infrastructure did not
support the updating and evaluation of reports, leading to a
huge manual workload in report preparation and metric
evaluation. The redesigning of KPIs, after implementation
of the new lean logistics concepts, has also not yet taken
place.
On the other hand, our observations also conﬁrmed the
research of Lohmann et al. [49] that typically some performance indicators and standardised reports are already in

Page 17 of 26

11

place. In addition, we ascertained that some top-level KPIs
are applied across the company’s sites. As the two sites
show similarities to that which other researchers typically
ﬁnd in industry, we assume them to be a good research
base.
5.2 Company-speciﬁc PMS adjustment
and evaluation of the PMS approach
For company-speciﬁc adjustments to the proposed PMS
framework, ﬁrst of all document analysis, workshops and
interviews within the two sites were conducted. We mainly
focused on the documentation of standard or reference
processes within logistics, which are available at central
departments.
By so doing, we aimed to provide an overview of the
company-wide objectives shared throughout our casestudy company. The analysis conﬁrmed our analysis of
logistics objectives within automotive logistics
(Sect. 4.2). Furthermore, we were able to identify some
company-speciﬁc objectives, e.g. employer branding
related targets. Those objectives were not broken down
to a functional, logistics level with more speciﬁc
objectives, but applied throughout the company. In the
following, we therefore focused on the objectives
speciﬁcally attributed to logistics.
After this alignment on the objectives of logistics, we
focused on the modiﬁcation of the PMS with its proposed
KPIs and PIs. As this step was also used as an evaluation
step, and not just as a modiﬁcation step, we conducted a
series of open workshops and interviews.
A ﬁrst workshop was conducted with the intention of
understanding the required (K)PIs that managers and
logistics experts on-site require to steer their business.
During these workshops, only a brief overview of the
proposed PMS was given, without a detailed explanation of
the included PIs and the modularisation approach. Thereafter, currently applied (K)PIs, and additional ones
required to monitor, control and improve logistics on-site,
were collected along the logistics process. The workshops
also showed that the additional metrics differ between the
two sites, conﬁrming that they are not generic PIs, but sitespeciﬁc.
Summarising the ﬁndings, we concluded that the current
set of metrics which are used within the two sites only
show a limited coverage of what should be measured to
effectively improve logistics processes. In addition, by
consolidating the results of the workshops, we found that
most of the metrics which were deemed necessary to
monitor, control and improve logistics were covered in our
developed PMS approach. An additional set of metrics was
identiﬁed which covered aspects that the experts within the
workshops judged to be site-speciﬁc.




Fig. 11 PMS for inbound logistics from implementation during the case study

Additional analysis was carried out to analyse the processes on-site and compare the results to the proposed
modules of our logistics PMS. Findings indicated that, by
combining our proposed process modules, all the relevant
steps within the logistics process could be monitored.
The ﬁndings from process analysis, interviews and workshops were consolidated and the additional metrics were
added to the proposed framework. In addition, we consolidated metrics that were named differently by different site
representatives but were the same metric, which again shows a
lack in overall standardisation of PIs. In a second round of
workshops, the consolidated PMS was presented and conﬁrmed by the logistics experts and managers.
Summarising the modiﬁcation and evaluation of the
overall PMS framework, we concluded that all the main
aspects along the process were covered within our
approach. In addition, we beneﬁted from the ﬂexibility
gained by our modularisation approach, which allowed us
to ﬁt the PMS to the processes within the focus sites and
company. Metrics which are currently available on-site, but
not yet considered within our system, could furthermore be
ﬂexibly added to the proposed dimensions of the PMS.
Figure 11 summarises as a selected example the PMS for
inbound logistics which was decided for implementation.



The ﬁgure highlights the limited number of additional PIs
and some metrics that were found not in focus yet and
therefore not priority for realisation. Those metrics especially cover the top-level metrics reﬂecting the lean principles. Whereas pull and tact are not yet in focus in the
operative logistics management, regarding the ﬂow metric
the experts judged it relevant, but the ﬁrst step of consolidating the throughput times and capturing them automatically as basis for the ﬂow calculation was set as priority.
We concluded that the framework approach helped to
increase the acceptance within the company and left room
for focus areas which were typically site-speciﬁc. At the
same time, the detailed scope of the suggested PMS actually helped with applying it in the automotive industry.
This ﬁnding is in line with previous research which highlighted the importance of shared standardised metrics on
the one hand [49], but allowed for additional, speciﬁc
metrics on the other.
5.3 Evaluation of the PMS in daily application
After the ﬁnal alignment, the proposed PMS was implemented into an IT system with an automated dashboard as a
basis, to provide logistics departments with the latest
information.
A ﬁrst direct beneﬁt is the signiﬁcantly reduced workload due to the automated updating of (K)PIs and their
consolidation. We concluded from our case study that
regarding the suggested (K)PIs most of the data are
available for automatic reporting. The approach of a process analysis including the information ﬂow and measurement points as base for reported data is therefore well
suited for deriving a PMS in automotive logistics. The
aspect of selecting (K)PIs within a PMS, for which data is
already available, mainly held true.
Furthermore, we evaluated the beneﬁt of the PMS and
the integrated PIs, with a focus on their design, to identify
continuous improvement potentials. In the following, an
example of the utilisation of a goods receiving function is
demonstrated. By selecting this aspect, we focused on the
link between inbound logistics and in-house logistics to
also demonstrate the logistics process perspective at this
interface.
Figure 12 shows the PM of truck arrivals on sites which
can be seen as an operational PI. The created transparency
highlights improvement potential in levelling truck arrivals, a main driver of the workload in trucks registration
and goods receiving. The calculated average arrivals during
one working week is 40 % of the peak load, in addition,

Page 19 of 26

11

signiﬁcant deviations in utilisation are highlighted, also
within shifts.
Analysing this PI further on a receiving dock level also
shows volatility at the receiving dock level (Fig. 13), with
an average utilisation amounting to *35 % of the peak
volumes.
Considering that stafﬁng levels are typically not set for
covering peaks, this leads to the hypothesis that truck
waiting-time increases in peak periods, a fact that is seen in
the increased truck-throughput time (waiting ? unloading
time), Fig. 14.
Combining Figs. 12 and 13, we concluded that, currently, the truck arrivals on-site, and at each receiving
dock, show further potential for levelling the workload, an
enabler for optimising costs in truck registration, receiving
dock and waiting-time charges for LSPs.
Linking these ﬁndings to potentials for increased target
fulﬁlment in logistics led to the conclusion that, in inbound
logistics costs, there is the potential to reduce waiting-time
charges (covered in transportation cost) by levelling the
truck arrivals. In addition, within in-house logistics, the
potential to optimise stafﬁng levels at truck registration, as
well as goods receiving, can be identiﬁed, leading to an
impact on in-house logistics cost.
Applying general thinking within lean literature,
reducing the volatility in load, especially high peak-overloads, will also lead to a reduction in mistakes in the

Fig. 12 Truck arrival at site during one selected week




Fig. 13 Truck arrival at one receiving dock during one week

Fig. 14 Waiting and (un)loading time during one week at a selected dock

involved functions as non-levelled operations are a source
of quality issues. The objective of increased ﬂow, and
therefore the increased lean degree of logistics on-site, is
also positively affected.



5.4 Evaluation summary
Our evaluation highlighted the general applicability of the

11

Fig. 15 Summary of evaluation
results

a German automotive OEM was used to demonstrate the
modiﬁcation and the application of the PMS in an industry
context. Furthermore, ﬁrst results from the PI analysis were
able to demonstrate continuous improvement potentials
towards an increased target fulﬁlment in the areas of efﬁciency, perfection and lean.
We found in particular that the ﬂexible design of the
system, with its modular approach, and the selected
dimensions, which leave room for adding company or sitespeciﬁc PIs, showed its applicability. This aspect was
highlighted during the application at two different sites.
While both sites are managed within the same company
and sharing the same objectives, they are still facing different operational problems and site speciﬁcs, demanding
for different additional metrics on an operational level. All
of them could be integrated into the proposed system.
Although the PMS is currently already implemented into
a monitoring cockpit, further research is needed on the
aspects of how to actually design a logistics PMS cockpit
and which intelligence to integrate into the system for
supporting the users as much as possible, e.g. by making
the IT tools capable of alerting the user in case of deviations from desired target values, or using learning algorithms to automatically highlight selected PMs.
Figure 15 summarises our evaluation results. We conclude from the experiences gained during the case study
that the proposed PMS is able to fulﬁl the design criteria
deﬁned from the current gaps in the literature and the
automotive
logistics
environment
(see
Fig. 3).

Nevertheless, considering the disadvantages of the casestudy approach leads us to demand a broader application of
the proposed PMS in industry to demonstrate its applicability beyond the focal company of our case study.

6 Conclusion
Our research focuses on the development of a PMS
applicable in the automotive logistics chain. The starting
point was the central research question of our paper, how a
PMS suitable for the automotive logistics environment
should be designed. The ﬁndings regarding the questions
addressed throughout the paper (Fig. 1) are summarised in
Fig. 16. The following section highlights the main contribution of our research to the body of knowledge in performance measurement in the automotive industry in the
context of lean logistics.
As highlighted during the literature review, academic
research, as well as industry, is currently lacking PMS
which are applicable in the automotive logistics environment and appropriately designed according to latest
research recommendations. The systems proposed in the
literature today lack speciﬁcity, while the systems in
industry lack standardisation and structure. Applied
reporting systems often miss a system perspective,
including linked PMs, as well as a supply chain perspective. The majority of them are currently internally focused,
with metrics not going beyond a single manufacturing site.




Fig. 16 Summary of our
research results

Furthermore, they often involve high manual workload for
data analysis and KPI evaluation.
Our research work proposes a modular PMS for the
automotive logistics chain to overcome the aforementioned
gaps and to answer the research question. We structure our
PMS along the logistics objectives which provide a frame
for the PMS development. A process perspective is integrated into the PMS to increase speciﬁcity and facilitate
continuous improvement initiatives. In addition, by integrating the lean logistics principles, an alignment of our
approach with the latest developments in logistics concepts
in industry is achieved and lean implementation is supported applying a consistent PMS.
To ensure standardisation and, at the same time, the
ﬂexibility to adapt the PMS to speciﬁc logistics processes
within a speciﬁc company or even manufacturing site, we
proposed a new, modular set-up of the PMS, breaking
down the identiﬁed logistics objectives to each process step
within the logistics chain, from a supplier to the customer.
The proposed modular PMS can be conﬁgured in line with
the processes, resulting in a consistent PMS for the whole
logistics chain and offering the potential for a supplychain-wide roll-out while, at the same time, covering sitespeciﬁc processes in a standardised way.
In addition, the comparability of PMs in terms of
benchmarking is ensured along the logistics process steps,
as well as in the overarching PMS. Ensuring operational



PIs are systematically linked in a cause-and-effect relationship, e.g. resource utilisation PIs in line with the main
cost drivers, further enables continuous improvement. In
addition, by ﬁrst providing a framework for the overall
PMS, the option to add own PIs for each step is kept, which
is seen in the literature as key to achieve an enabling,
motivating PMS.
With our selected approach, we hoped to deliver a
system applicable in the automotive context, speciﬁc
enough for practitioners to implement the approach, whilst
also allowing the ﬂexibility to adapt it to the company’s
context.
The evaluation of the proposed approach at two manufacturing sites of a German automotive OEM demonstrated
the applicability of the proposed framework. The objectives identiﬁed in the literature could be seen in line with
the set of objectives followed within the logistics function
of our case-study company. The selected PMs are seen to
be relevant according to all the experts and management
involved in the evaluation process. In addition, site-speciﬁc
metrics could be ﬁtted to the proposed framework.
The case study at two different sites with different
speciﬁcations was able to demonstrate not only the general
applicability, but also the beneﬁts of the modularisation
approach. This allowed an efﬁcient implementation of the
PMS at the two focus sites. Furthermore, all the relevant
exhaustive coverage of the applied logistics processes by
our modules. In addition, this logic showed signiﬁcant
beneﬁts during IT implementation, where it facilitated the
development of a standardised dashboard—allowing
eliminating manual workload for standard KPI evaluation.
During the application phase of the PMS, the standardisation and modularisation proved its beneﬁts in terms of the
identiﬁcation of improvement potentials. Even though
processes overall are typically hardly comparable, on a
module level comparisons can lead to the identiﬁcation of
improvement potentials (e.g. in the picking process, in
warehousing).
The need for further research can be seen in the evaluation
and roll-out to non-vehicle manufacturing sites, e.g. engine
and drive-train sites. By doing so, applicability to the whole
scope of automotive manufacturing and logistics can be
evaluated. In addition, the required boundary conditions
within a company to implement and actually constantly use
such a PMS needs further research (e.g. acceptance of PIs
and open culture regarding improvement ideas).
By further rolling out the proposed PMS to a ﬁrst-tier–
second-tier relationship, the applicability for the automotive chain can be evaluated further as, up to now, the
applicability could only be proven in a relationship with
OEM involvement.
Following up on the results of our evaluation, an additional area for further research has been identiﬁed: How to
properly design a performance-monitoring cockpit? This
includes the presentation of results, but also the logic built
into the system itself (e.g. advanced analytics and linked
alerting functions). While the PIs and the PMS itself are
seen to enable continuous improvement, some potential is
still seen, further enabling the PMS’s user to quickly
identify the current state of logistics performance and

Page 23 of 26

11

potential improvements. We hope that the latest approaches in research and industry will offer improvement
potentials for this area, e.g. carrying over big data discussions to autonomous performance evaluation.
Should the PMS ﬁnd a broad application, an integration
of the selected PIs, and their standardised deﬁnition, can be
further recommended in supply chain management IT tools
to address today’s challenge that typically there is no
aligned support of performance management by standard
IT systems—this is seen as one reason for today’s broadly
varying PMS approaches.
We hope our research will further increase the discussion on PMS in automotive logistics and that our suggested
approach forms the base for further rolling out PMS across
the automotive supply chain.
