Introduction
The economic activity enhancement, doubled by the conventional technological progress,
as well as the demographical advance have consequences upon the natural capital and
social welfare. In order to counteract these damages, the organizations should develop a
sustainable conduct in respect of optimizing the relationship between the economic, social
and environmental dimensions, conduct exhibited both at business level and upstream
relationships level (supply), respectively downstream level (distribution).
Considering that the primary objective of each organization is to generate profit, in the
traditional marketing vision, the accent fell on satisfying the customers’ needs and therefore
on optimizing the distribution activity. In the context of the existing modifications within
the economic environment towards the adoption of a sustainable conduct, there took place
the transition from the convetional marketing to the sustainable marketing. According to
Beltz and Peattie (2012, pp.16) sustainable marketing offers solutions to the existing
solutions, taking into account: an ecological direction (satisfying the current needs in the
context of the limited resources), viability (technical feasibility and economic competition),
ethics (social equity and avoidance of injust actions), relationships (with the customers and
other parties interested).
Gathering information useful for shaping a sustainable marketing strategy was done based
on the information published by the organizations lined up to the IIRC pilot programme.
This guides the organizations towards the development of integrated reports, including both
financial and non-financial data. At present, the information related to sustainability are
mainly displayed into the sustainability reports but there are also cases where the required
information is displayed into the annual reports, integrated reports or other types of reports.
According to a common action (GRI and IIRC, 2013), given that at the level of the
international integrated reporting framework there are not forecast specific key
performance indicators, IIRC encourages the organizations to use the guidelines of Global
Reporting Initiative (GRI) sustainable reporting.
The sustainable reports including various non-finacial information, drawn up by the
organizations to satisfy the informational need of the stakeholders, were often considered a
way to promote the organization image, to reduce the informational asymmetry, respecively
to increase rightfulness (Duchon and Drake, 2009; Higgins and Walker, 2012; Hahn and
Lülfs, 2014). One way of communicating the information through the agency of these
reports is represented by the social and environmental indicators displayed by the
organizations. By displaying these indicators, there are emphasized both positive and
negative aspects in respect of the organizational activity, part of them being considered
useful instruments for the sustainable marketing. Although within the classical view
marketing is intended mainly for obtaining a brand value, the organizations should not
avoid displaying the negative information in order to ensure the ethical feature and
rightfulness.
Starting from the aspects presented above, our research tries to answer the question: to what
extent the non-financial reporting could be considered a useful instrument for establishing a
sustainable marketing strategy?

The degradation of the natural capital as a result of the resource consumption acceleration
represents a challenge with regard to the attention that an organization has to pay to the
non-financial reporting. GRI has an important role in the improvement of the non-financial
reporting by elaborating various reporting guides, the last version being G4 (2013). On the
other hand, IIRC (2013) developed an International <Integrated Reporting> Framework
which is used by the organizations which want to publish integrated reports. Analysing the
two bodies from the perspective of the materiality principle (the strategy adopted by an
organization and the way to report the most relevant challenges and opportunities regarding
sustainability), Allison-Hope and Morgan (2013) notice the fact that the IIRC analyses the
materiality from the perspective of what is meaningful to investors, while GRI analyses this
principle from the perspective of what is relevant to investors and other stakeholders. Even
though the two bodies act independently, there are convergence points between them.
According to a study conducted at international level by Ernst & Young (2014), a lack of
transparency of the organizations regarding the publication of the non-financial information
can lead to losing the investors, as they are likely to take into account the information
published by an organization to the expense of the ones published by third parties. In this
context, the importance that an organization has to grant to the information published in the
non-financial reports for the investors of other stakeholders is increasing, these reports
being considered marketing tools (Boiral, 2013).
Sheth and Parvatiyar (1995) proppose the name of sustainable marketing in the context of
pointing out the necessity of a change from the classical paradigm, cast at satifying the
consumers’ needs, towards another one taking into consideration aspects related to the
environment, too. In time, the approaches became more refined. According to Fuller (1999,
pp. 4), sustainable marketing represents the “Process of planning, implementing and
controlling the development, pricing, promotion and product distribution in a manner that
satisfies the following three criteria: (1) the customer needs are met, (2) the
organizational goals are attained, and (3) the process is compatible with ecosystems”. In the
opion of Charter et al. (2006, p. 12) sustainable marketing means “creating, producing and
delivering sustainable solutions with higher net sustainable value whilst continuously
satisfying customers and other stakeholders”. Belz and Peattie (2009, p. 31) initially move
emphasize from the achievement of the organization objectives towards the social and
environmental dimension, in their view the sustainable marketing being given by ‘building
and maintaining sustainable relationships with customers, the social environment and the
natural environment. Further on, the authors offer a more refined approach, the sustainable
marketing being considered “an evolution of marketing that blends the mainstream
economic and technical perspectives with the emerging concepts of relationship marketing
and the social, ethical, environmental and intergenerational perspectives of the sustainable
development agenda” (Belz and Peatie 2012, p.17).
Taking into account the social and environmental dimensions in drawing up a marketing
strategy stakes on the customers’ conduct in relation to the these dimensions. In this
respect, the approach of sustainable marketing strategies, as well as of the factors
influencing these strategies, was performed within a study developed by Belz and SchmidtRiediger (2010). According to this market partition, the organizations adopt an appropriate
strategy. On one hand, the market breakdown in terms of the consumers’ affinities related
to social and environmental aspects, generates three categories: consumers that gives great
attention to the social and environmental aspects to the detriment of costs, consumers that
consider temperately these aspects, respectively consumers that do not take into
consideration these aspects, but they insist on low costs. On the other hand, Brown and
Dacin (1997), Handelman and Arnold (1999), respectively Williams and Siegel (2001)
reached the conclusion that the consumer psychology is influenced also by publishing the
information (positive or negative) considering the corporate social responsibility (CSR), in
the sense that publishing certain positive information favours the disposition to
consumption and vice versa. Also, within the consumer category there is the trend to
appreciate the fact that the organizations publishing CSR information are more honest,
more credible and they offer higher quality products.
Kumar and Christodoulopoulou (2014) propose a conceptual framework pointing out the
manner in which the implementation of certain sustainable marketing practices could
contribute to the improvement of the organization performance by: (1) direct benefits, in
case the application of marketing strategies contributes to the activity optimization and cost
diminution and (2) indirect benefits, generated by the communication of specific
information to the stakeholders, fact generating brand value. The link between the existence
of certain sustainable marketing practices and obtaining brand value by the organization
was brought into discussion by many authors. According to Lantos (2001), Luo and
Bhattacharya (2006), respectively Griffith, Cavusgil and Xu (2008), publishing CSR
information contributes to the increase of the organization fame and its market value. On
the other hand, in order not to affect the image of an organization, the display of negative
incidents into the non-financial reports is limited. This trend of priority presentation of
positive information to the detriment of the negative ones was emphasized during time
within many studies (Deegan and Gordon, 1996; Deegan and Rankin, 1996; Holder-Webb
et al. 2009; Hahn and Lülfs, 2014).
The researches on the information displayed into the sustainability reports drawn up
according to GRI led to divergent results. On one hand, there are studies demonstrating the
fact that the sustainability reports drawn up according to the GRI guidelines, doubled by the
assessment of an independent auditor, offer credible information (Dando and Swift, 2003;
Gilbert and Rasche, 2007). On the other hand, Boiral (2013) investigates the extend to
which the information displayed into the sustainability reports drawn up according to the
GRI referential represent only a marketing strategy baring the role of concealing the
problems of the organization and favourably presenting its projects and position. He
analyzed the extent to which the negative events identified on the basis of the information
published into the external sources were displayed into the sustainability reports. The
author’s conclusion was that the transparency of the published information was limited
(only 10% of the significant events given to the public were clearly and explicitely
presented into the published reports).

2. Research methodology
Connelly, Ketchen and Slater (2011) anlyse the most important organizational theories that
could be used in approaching researches upon the theme of sustainable affaires marketing:
the agency theory, institutional theory, organizational ecology, resource dependence theory,
signaling theory, social network theory, transaction cost economics, the resource-based

bares the interest.
Knowing that the organizations want to obtain legitimacy through the voluntary eporting of
sustainable practices, we will use as a theorectical framework the institutional theory.
Ensuring rightfulness could be done by three mechanisms: coercive isomorphism (legal
regulations), mimetic isomorphism (imitating the conduct of the leading organization
within the activity sector), respectively the regulatory isomorphism (generated by the
pressure exercised through professional bodies or of other nature, respectively mass-media)
(DiMaggio and Powell 1983). An important role in generating a regulatory isomorphism is
held by the GRI.
In order to offer indications about an organization sustainability, GRI (G4) defined a
number of 90 indicators from the following areas: economic (coded EC1-EC9), social
(subdivised on three categories codified: LA1 - LA16, HR1 – HR12, SO1- SO11 and PR1PR9), and environmental (coded EN1-EN34). Each of the organizations that presenting
reports in this respect could choose to report the indicators considered relevant. Beginning
with the idea that, in order to ensure business sustainability, an organization should take
into consideration both environmental and social aspects, we selected 30 indicators
(Appendix 1) reflecting both positive and negative aspects. Their selection and
classification was done in two steps. In a first step the indicators used to present technical
information were eliminated, as they were considered irrelevant form the point of view of
the sustainable marketing (for instance EN8: Volume of water used on sources). During the
selection 60 indicators were eliminated. During the second step we classified the indicators
in: indicators communicating positive aspects (for instance EN2: The percentage of the
materials used which are generated in a recycling process in the total amount of materials),
and indicators communicating negative aspects (for instance PR6: The number of products
sold, considered forbiddedn or controversed). The classification was made starting from the
explanations included in the GRI manual regarding the information to be reported for each
indicator (GRI, 2013). 14 indicators were analysed indicating positive aspects and 16
indicators reflecting negative aspects. The analysis was performed following the activities
to be considered to draw up a sustainable marketing strategy: supply – production –
distribution (Figure no. 1).

Figure no. 1: Indicators for sustainable marketing strategy
In order to set the analysis sample, we started with a 99 international organizations that
entered into the IIRC Pilot Programme, in respect of the integrated reporting, from the
following sectors of activity: Basic Materials, Consumer Goods, Consumer Services,
Health Care, Industrials, Oil & Gas, Technology, Telecommunications and Utilities (IIRC,
2013). The selection criteria applied and the organizations eliminated after applying each
selection criteria are presented in the following table (Table no. 1).


Nunber of
organisations
Selection criteria
before
99
The sector of activity
should have a significant
impact on the environment
65
The organization should
use for reporting of nonfinancial indicators the
GRI (G4) version. 1.
42
The published report
(integrated report,
sustainability report,
annual report or other type
of report) should refer to
the year 2013 activity 2.
24
The report can be
consulted on accessing date

Nunber of
organisations
after
Organizations belonging
65
to the sector Financials
(34).
Organizations which
42
did not report at the
end of the study
according to (G4) (23).
Organizations which
24
did not publish the
2013 report at the
consultation date (18).
Excluded
organizations

Organizations for
which we could not
access the report (5).

19

After applying these criteria, a number of 19 organizations remained, belonging to 9 sectors
of activity (Figure no. 2).

Figure no. 2: Companies’ distribution by countries and industries
The information collection took place during the period 1 November 2014 – 1 March 2015.
After identifying the existence of the 30 indicators in the GRI index grid, drawn up by each
organization, we proceeded to analysing the information published within the report. This
was done by comparison of the information declared by the organization as being related to
a certain indicator with the existing reporting requirements from the GRI (G4) (GRI, 2013)
implementation manual. The investigated indicators were divided into four categories:
(a) integrally reported indicators, (b) partly reported indicators, (c) indicators for which the
value given is zero (category relevant for the analysis of the indicators reflecting negative
1

2

The main novelty in comparison to the prior version GRI (G3.1) is represented by the introduction
of new indicators taking into consideration the assessment of suppliers in terms of sustainability,
aspect considered relevant for shaping a sustainable marketing strategy.
Should the reporting period not coincide with the calendar year, the last published report related to
this year was taken into account (for example, 1 July 2013 - 30 June 2014).

drawn up by each organization or about which there is a specification into the report of
available information non-existence).
3. Results and discussions
As a result of collecting information on the selected indicators that are useful for
sustainable marketing, reporting rate was found as follows: 53% for the positive and 33%
for negative aspects. Regarding the negative aspects, a percent of 15% are those who say
that they had no events of this nature. The other 18%, after mentioning the negative aspects,
provides information in order to justify this situation or presents measures to mitigate
environmental and social impact. (figure no. 3)

Figure no. 3: Extent of reportig (poitive and negative aspects)
Taking into account the fact that the display of the GRI indicators is voluntary, and there was
noticed heterogeneousness both at the level of presentation and the content of information for
the 30 selected indicators at the level of organizations, we selected the main information
published by organisations considered relevant in shaping a sustainable marketing strategy. In
this respect, there were emphasized mainly the particular pieces of information regarding
sustainability in terms of supply and distribution for each organization within the investigated
sectors of activity. The analysis of the organizations grouped on activity sectors is justified by
the existence of some differences for each activity (supply, production, distribution) according
to the characteristics of the sector (Table no. 2):
Tabel no. 2. Average score at the level of the activity sectors and activities
Sectors of activity
Oil & Gas
Technology
Consumer Goods
Utilities
Industrials
Basic Materias
Telecommunications
Consumer Services
Health Care

Supply
Average
Sector
14.81
11.60
14.81
20.50
14.81
20.50
14.81
8.00
14.81
14.67
14.81
20.00
14.81
20.00
14.81
10.00
14.81
8.00

Production
Average
Sector
17.76
16
17.76
12.50
17.76
22
17.76
28
17.76
15.33
17.76
19
17.76
19
17.76
14
17.76
14

Distribution
Average
Sector
28.87
20.20
28.87
25.50
28.87
30.25
28.87
28
28.87
22
28.87
37
28.87
34
28.87
32
28.87
30

 Basic Materias (AkzoNobel, Solvay)
AkzoNobel is an atypical case of reporting the GRI indicators for the year 2013, in the
sense that initially GRI (G3.1) was used as a reporting basis (AkzoNobel, 2013a). After
that, another document was published offering further information, pointing out that, by
cumulating the information from both documents, a GRI (G4) reporting is ensured
(AkzoNobel, 2013b). Nevertheless, the published documents do not contain information on
the sustainability of suppliers (EN32, EN33, LA14, LA15, HR10, HR11, SO9, SO10).
Complying with the latest reporting standards into the field is an indication that the
organization is interested in ensuring rightfulness and possibly obtaining brand value.
In terms of the object of activity, part of the products sold by Solvay carry risks for
consumers due to a high reactivity and several toxic peculiarities, for this fact being
presented the PR6 indicator, absent from most of the grids belonging to the other
organizations under investigation (Solvay, 2013, pp. 107). In order not to be perceived as a
negative message by the consumers, this information is counterbalanced by pointing out the
rightfulness and it is mentioned the fact that they are to be replaced by safer alternatives in
ecological and social views. There should be noticed the fact that this organization did not
performed surveys in respect of client satisfaction. Moreover, the organization reports
partial information regarding the suppliers’ sustainability (EN32, LA14, HR10, SO9).
 Consumer Goods (Coca Cola Company, Marks and Spencer, Inditex, Natura)
The indicators displayed by Coca-Cola Company are limited, for the supply activity being
displayed only one indicator partially (HR10). In respect of the production activity, only
two indicators are reported: decrease of the power consumption (EN6), respectively
undertaking to decrease the greenhouse gas emissions (EN19). For the distribution activity
it is noticed that none of the indicators included by GRI is not displayed under specific
aspects for the section “organization responsibility in respect of the supplied products”
(PR1 - PR9), implicitly the indicators which are included under subsection “communication
through marketing” (PR6, PR7) (Coca-Cola Company, 2014).
Since 2010, Marks & Spencer classify suppliers (category of gold, silver, bronze).
Although in the GRI grid related to the organization is not mentioned the fact that the EN12
indicator, reflecting the impact of the organization activity upon the biodiversity, is
reported only partially, by comparison with the GRI implementation manual it is noticed
that the negative aspects which should have been described are not pointed out (Marks &
Spencer, 2014, pag. 29, 39). In respect of the survey on the client satisfaction, the
organization increased these studies, moving from survey organized mnthly (client
satisfaction degree of 81%) to more frequent surveys organized into stores and ended by
prizes (Marks & Spencer, 2013, pp. 13, 24).
Inditex (2013, p. 55) presents information combined on the four directions (EN32, LA14,
HR10, SO9) about the supplier audit, their acceptance degree being of 2 out of 3. Since
2012 there has been adopted the strategy “zero discharge” for dangerous chemicals. As a
result of the suppliers audit in respect of labour practices (LA15), human rights (HR11) ans
impact on society (SO10), the emphasize of negative situations (for example, labour
conditions, compliance with the working hours and appropriate payment) is presented in
comparison with the positive situations, being mentioned the fact that there were taken
actions in respect of remedying the defficiencies (Inditex, 2013, pp. 58-59). In terms of
negative impact on biodiversity, there are displayed only the actions taken to attenuate it
(Inditex, 2013, pp. 75, 84, 86, 287). In respect of the distribution activity, respectively the
client relationship, we emphasize the fact that the organization turns to an Integrated
Systems for Packaging Management (EN28). In terms of the consumer satisfaction
received in respect of the traded products, pointing out the fact that they are on average
only 3 per store.
The Natura organization informs the stakeholders in respect of the new suppliers’ audit
(EN32, LA14, HR10, SO9). It is mentioned that though they were verified only in a
percentage of 2.3%, they cover 70% of the procurement volume. Also, there were assessed
the risks arisen within the supply network (EN33, LA15, SO10, HR11). Displaying the
intimations related to environment, labour practices and society (EN34, LA16, SO11) was
performed numerically, in comparison with the prior years, pointed out the fact that they
were entirely solved (Natura, 2013, p. 72). In order to assess the consumers’ satisfaction
(PR5), there was carried out a survey testing the consumer loyalty (51.6% of the local
consumers, respectively 54.2 of the international consumers gave the maximum rating), the
preference over the company products (43.8% of the local consumers and 16.6 of the
international consumers), respectively the intention to recommend the company products
(77.5% of the international consumers) (Natura, 2013, p. 105).
 Consumer Services (Melia)
Meliá Hotels International presents visibly (oversized letters, variously coloured, centrally
positioned) information regarding the audit of suppliers in respect of the sustainability
criterion (EN32, LA14, HR10, SO9) (Meliá Hotels International, 2013, pp. 48-49). The
same display manner is used also for the EN19 indicator, regarding the decrease of the
greenhouse gas emissions. Moreover, the organization emphasisesm the fact that it is
situated on the first place (83 points from 100) into a classification where there are present
125 hotels from Spain, classification regarding the transparency extent in terms of CO2
emissions (Meliá Hotels International, 2013, pp. 84-85). Testing the satisfaction of the
customers is performed both by individual surveys on each brand within the group, the
degree of satisfaction varying between 80.9% and 86.1% and by on-line testing (81.3%)
(Meliá Hotels International, 2013, p. 63).
 Health Care (Takeda)
Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited is one of the pioneer organizations within the
integrated reporting domain. Although according to the GRI (G4) index issued by the
organization, most of the indicators regarding the sustainability of suppliers appear as nonreported (EN32, LA14, LA15, HR10, HR11, SO9), the content of the report discloses the
fact that it is practised a form of suppliers’ evaluation by completing a questionaire taking
into account all four criteria (Takeda, 2013, p. 53). In respect of EN33 and SO10, indicators
that should point out both the significant negative impact and its counter actions, the
organization displays only the measures to avoid such impact, the negative impact not
being mentioned. A particular aspect in the view of the sustainable marketing is offered by
the fact that the organization indicates into the report that it promotes among suppliers the
application of the same policy, included into the guidelines related to the sustainable
procurement. By displaying the EN12 indicator, the organization points out its involvement
into biodiversity preservation internalizing the growth of plants used as raw material.
Although they did not report negative incidents in respect of PR2 and PR4, we notice the
fact that, unlikely most of the organizations reporting these indicators as zero value, the
organization presents detailed information in terms of the adopted policy in the two
directions (Takeda, 2013, pp. 58, 68, 69).

 Industrials (BAM Group, Votorantim)
BAM Group does not display information in respect of the sustainability indicators related
to the supply process, respectively distribution. In terms of impact on the environment of
the organization activity, in the GRI grid there are displayed only two of the selected
indicators for analysis within this study: EN6 and EN19. According to the GRI (G4)
reporting guidelines, the EN6 indicator displays quantitative information, detailed on types
of energy, manner of calculation and presentation, respectively the used calculation
methodology. The organization displays only a general information in terms of setting up
objectives to diminish power consumption, without specifying their level, respectively the
fact that the power consumption increased as compared to the previous year (BAM Group,
2013, p. 38).
Votorantim offers information on the suppliers’ assessment in respect of the their
sustainability (EN32, LA14, HR10, SO9), 82% of the suppliers being approved further
verification (Votorantim, 2013, pag. 113). With reference to the negative impact asociated
with the supplier assessment criteria (EN33, LA15, HR11, SO10), such information is not
displayed. It is worthy of note that in respect of the indicators related to the distribution
activity, there is given information only for three of them (EN27, EN31 and SO7).
 Oil & Gas (NIAEP, Petrobras, Rosatom, Sasol, Snam )
NIAEP is an atypical case in respect of reporting the indicators selected for analysis within
this research, in the sense that within the GRI grid there are only three indicators. Out of
these, PR1 representing the weight of products and services assessed in order to improve
their impact upon the users’ health and security is reported as 100%. The indicators PR2
and PR9, representing the number of incidents in terms of product impact and population
health and security service impact, respectively the value of fines paid for non-compliance
with the regulations within the health and security domain, are presented as bearing zero
value (NIAEP, 2013).
For Petrobras, the information display in respect of supplier sustainability (EN32, EN33,
LA14, LA15, HR10, HR11, SO9, SO10) is not accomplished. A specific situation is given
by the fact that the power consumption increased (EN6), stating the cause which generated
the increase. According to GRI (2013), the EN12 indicator should embody predominantly
negative information, whereas the organization should present only preventive aspects:
mounting obstacles to prevent animal access within the exploitation areas, personnel
training for clearing off animals within the dangerous areas, respectively offering
emergency treatment in case of endangered species (Petrobras, 2013, p. 52). For the
distribution activity, respectively the relationship with the customers, none of the specific
indicators is displayed into the GRI grid.
ROSATOM does not report indicators related to supplier sustainability. In terms of the
distribution activity, the organization presents only part information related to the PR1 and
PR5 indicators. Practically, the result of an investigation carried out at the level of 57
partner organizations in respect of the development of activities related to the nuclear
power supply is the following: 39.5% are for maintaining the same level, and 30.8% for
developing this activity. In terms of power sources that could be used when the
conventional sources would be exhausted, the organization promotes the ideea that 39.9%
of the respondents opt in favour of the nuclear power (ROSATOM, 2013).

in respect of the sustainability criteria, Sasol introduced new protocols related to their
verification, taking into consideration the labour and environmental practices (EN32,
LA14), but it did not offer information on the results of these assessments (Sasol, 2014).
At Snam organization level, the supplier assessment on sustainability criteria follows
mainly three directions (EN32, LA14 and HR10) (Snam, 2013, pp. 43,45). The evaluation
is performed differentially on types fo suppliers (goods or services), the suppliers of goods
being classified into four risk categories, taking into account also economic and
technological aspects. Certifications are required for the high risk categories (ISO 9001 și
ISO14001) in order to ensure rightfulness.
 Telecommunications (SK Telecom)
In respect of assessing suppliers according to their sustainability (EN32, LA14, HR10,
SO9), SK Telecom proceeded to their verification based on written documents (52.6%),
respectively based on the information on the site (8.8%). There were 2 cases of temporary
or permanent suspension of suppliers. In respect of negative incidents (EN33, LA15, HR11,
SO10), there was not signaled any (SK Telecom, 2013, pp. 133-138). With reference to the
activity development, it is worth mentioning the fact that for the EN6 indicator, referring to
the decrease of power consumption, the organization registered an increase of 5.4% as
compared to the previous year, and for this increase there are given substantiations (SK
Telecom, 2013, p. 144). It is worth mentioning that the surveys regarding the satisfaction of
customers (PR5) are performed by three independent firms from Korea, the organization
emphasizing the ranging on the first place within these surveys for 16 years in a row.
 Technology (Indra, SAP)
Since 2013 Indra has changed its strategy regarding the supplier selection process that is the
audit of suppliers (EN32, LA14, HR10, SO9). In terms of EN 33 and LA15 indicators, it is
mentioned the fact that the supply activity has impact on the environment and at social
level, but there are not offered details in this respect (Indra, 2013, p. 70). For expenditure
and investment (EN31), the information submitted by Indra (139-140) displays a
retrospective analysis of 5 years, relevant in this respect being the waste management. The
assessment of customers’ satisfaction (PR5) is performed by indicators: global client
satisfaction indicator (3.85 out of 5), existing recommendations (7.24 out of 10) and the net
promotion score (3) (Indra, 2013, p. 93).
Since October 2013 SAP has been verifying all new suppliers by completing a
questionnaire. Similarly, the Snam case, the organization presents information for the
related criteria EN32, LA14, respectively HR10. Brand promotion through the agency of
customers is an objective for the organization. Within PR5 indicator there is displayed
information on the increase of the net promoter score in comparison with the previous year,
reflecting the customer availability to recommend the product to acquainttances (Sap,
2013).
 Utilities (CPFL)
CPFL Energia does not report indicators in terms of sustainability of suppliers (EN32,
EN33, LA14, LA15, HR10, HR11, SO9, SO10). With reference to the organization impact
on biodiversity (EN12), it is mentioned the fact that there are social and environmental
effects generated by the mounting of hydroelectric power plants, but the organization took
actions in preserving and rebuilding the affected areas (EN27) (CPFL Energia, 2013, p.
103). In terms of client satisfaction (PR5), there were performed studies by two
independent organizations, at the level of the eight distributors, being investigated the
following sirections: information, accesibility, respectively client safety, respectively power
supply, communication and information, billing and perception in respect of maintenance.
The analysis of the information at the level of the activity sectors showed the fact that there
are differences regarding the indicators reporting. Thus, for the supply activity, the total
score granted to the organizations in the sectors Oil & gas, Utilities, Industrial, Materials
and Health care was smaller than the average for all the activity sectors. For the rest of the
activity sectors analysed the score was higher than the average. For the production activity
for the organizations in the activity sectos Oil & gas, Technology, Industrial, Health care
and Materials a smaller score than the average was registered, and at the level of the
organizations in the activity sectors Consumer goods, Utilities, Telecommunications and
Services a higher score than the average was registered. Regarding the distribution activity,
the split on activity sectors was made as it follows: for the activity sectors Oil & gas,
Technology, Utilities and Industrial the socre computed was lower than the average, while
for the activity sectors Consumer goods, Telecommunications , Services, Health care and
Materials there was a score higher than the average. An analysis of the reporting of the
indicators along the entire supply – production – distribution chain shows that in the
activity sectors in which the relationship with the customers is a direct one (Consumer
goods, Telecommunications, Services) the degree of the indicators reporting is higher than
the average, this aspect being justified on one hand by the organizations’ wish to assure the
legitimacy, and on the other hand by their use as a marketing strategy (most of the
information which contributed to a score above the average is information which shows
positive aspects). On the contrary, in the activity sectors in which the relationship with the
customers is less important (Oil & gas, Industrials) we notice the existence of a contrary
situation.

Conclusions
Beginning by the diferentiate analysis of indicators, a first observation is given by the fact
that the negative information presentation is limited. Only 15 % of the organizations report
zero value for these indicators, whereas 67 % of them omit the display of the indicator
referred to. In cases where negative information on sustainability is presented, it is counterbalanced either by a justification, or by the presentation of attenuation or deletion
strategies. These conclusions are complementary to the research developed by Boiron
(2013), according to which the information displayed within the sustainability reports
represents a marketing strategy, respectively the research carried out by Hahn and Lülfs
(2014) pointing out the fact that the display of negative information is motivated by the
assurance of rightfulness.
Based on the premises according to which the marketing activity aims mainly to satisfy the
consumer needs and their training in respect of sustainability tones down the characteristics
of these needs, an organization should take into consideration the entire chain supply –
production - distribution in terms of adjusting its products and services to the new
requirements of the market.

relationship with the suppliers. The new requirements of the GRI (G4) indicator reporting
draw four directions in this respect: verifying the compliance with the environment criteria
by the suppliers (EN32), labour practices (LA14), human rights (HR10) and society (SO9).
After analyzing the conduct in respect of reporting these indicators by the studied
organizations, there was observed the fact that, although not all organizations offered
practical data on the supplier assessment, most of them pointed out the existence of a
proceeding in this respect, as well as the commencement of this action. The lack of
information regarding the indicators concerning the suppliers (EN32, LA14, HR10, SO9)
can be caused by the fact that 2013 was the first year in which the organizations use the
version G4 of the GRI guidelines. The previous versions did not ask for this type of
information. It is worth mentioning case Meliá (2013) which emphasizes this information
(oversized letters, variously coloured, centrally positioned), respectively case Takeda
(2013) which mentions the fact that the guidelines on the sustainable procurement is
offered to its suppliers, in order to apply the same policy.
The indicators related to the procurement and distribution of sustainable products,
respectively rendering services within sustainable conditions, are mainly favourable
presented. For example, Meliá (2013) emphasizes the positive message (oversized letters,
variously coloured, centrally positioned) in respect of EN19 indicator, referring to the
decrease of greenhouse gas emissions and adding the fact that it is on first place
classification related to the transparency degree in terms of CO2 emissions. The same type
of message, as leader in the domain, is submitted by SK Telecom (2013) in respect of the
client satisfaction (PR5): first place in surveys, for 16 consecutive years.
Besides rightfulness procurement, reporting such information on sustainability offers to an
organization brand value and, in addition, it represents a useful instrument in developing a
sustainable marketing strategy. By mimetic isomorphism, this conduct type could be
disseminated towards other organizations, which could represent a new direction of
research.

