Sustainability and Organizational Change

AE

EMPIRICAL STUDY ON THE INDICATORS OF SUSTAINABLE
PERFORMANCE –THE SUSTAINABILITY BALANCED SCORECARD,
EFFECT OF STRATEGIC ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE
Maria Radu
Academy of Economic Studies, Bucharest, Romania

Abstract
The sustainable organizational change has an ever increasing importance, leading to the
rethinking of the management and systems of performance measurement and monitoring
within the companies. As a reaction to current economic phenomena, in the first section of
this work we tried to bring out the need for using the couple Balanced Scorecard Corporate Social Responsibility by companies. Thus, companies involved in sustainable
actions must grant a great importance to the impact of environmental, social and economic
factors in providing added value, informing the interested parties and reflecting the
reporting of sustainable performance. As a consequence, in the second part of the work we
present the Sustainability Balanced Scorecard for the implementation of efficient strategies
which cumulate the economic, social and environmental aspects as integrating system for
sustainable performance and as a new challenge for organizational change. The key
performance indicators included in the Sustainability Balanced Scorecard are quantified by
the indicators of sustainable development, based on which the empirical research described
in the third section of the work was achieved. Through the quantitative analysis of the
economic and ecological indicators (Gross Domestic Product per capita, respective,
Environmental Performance Index) in correlation with the social indicator (Global
Competitive Index), we conclude that the implementation of green strategies by companies
leads to sustainable economic growth.
Keywords: sustainability, organizational change, Sustainability Balanced Scorecard,
performance indicators, competitiveness
JEL Classification: D60, O12, Q56

Introduction
Economic, social and environmental changes around the world enhanced by the global
crisis have, become, in an increasing manner, the target of discussions and concerns of



Author’s contact: e-mail: maria_m_dinu@yahoo.com

international organizations, governments, investors and corporations in relation to the
growth of corporate responsibility and sustainability.
In the last three decades, sustainability and corporate social responsibility show an evergrowing increase in importance in the research on business and organization stimulating the
need for responsibility of the organizations that are looking for ways to measure and
manage their interactions in the field (Gray, 2007). Corporate social responsibility is seen
as an intelligent investment, bringing benefits both to the company, and to the entire
community. Improving the relationship with the community (clients, suppliers, authorities),
influencing the target audience, positioning the company on a superior step in society, good
reputation for the company, client loyalty towards the company and its products, motivating
the employees and building excellence in business granting a real competitive leverage are
important contributions of corporate social responsibility. Social responsibility is essential
for the long term prosperity of companies and sheds light on the human dimension of
business, representing a vital connection with society, in general, and with the community
where the business is located, in particular. (Dinu, 2011).
The concept of sustainability must be analyzed and understood together with other notions
in relation with the role and responsibilities of an organization and its performance. In this
context a conceptual trans-disciplinary framework is needed for a multi-dimensional
understanding of the role and responsibilities of a corporate company (Caraiani, et al.,
2010b). The sustainable actions of corporations involve granting an increasing importance
to the environmental, social and economic factors, which should bring an increased value
and information for the stakeholders and which is reflected through the reporting to
sustainable performance.
The increase in competitiveness and the development of an economy based on knowledge
with an emphasis on the improvement of the energetic efficiency and the use of alternative
bio-regenerating resources, the protection and improvement of the quality of the
environment, the improvement of the living standards, the development and a more
efficient usage of the human capital through social promotions are relevant requirements
for a sustainable development.
The researches in the specialized literature have tried to stimulate the evolving thinking on
sustainability. Samimi, et al. (2011) performs an empirical study on the relationship
between human development and environmental performance by using a regression model
in panel. The conclusions support a positive relationship between the two indicators for the
case study countries, the human development significantly influencing the environmental
performance. A distinction is made between the developed and the developing countries,
the latter needing more attention from the public and more support from the international
bodies (Samimi, et al., 2011). Cimpoeru, et al. (2011) also proves a positive relationship
between the environment and economic development.
At the present sustainability reporting is voluntary and achieved either separately, or in
relation with the annual reporting of the companies. Empirical studies published in
reference to the relation between the social aspects and the environment presented by the
companies and the instruments for profit measurement, if any, prove to be insignificant
(Lungu, et al., 2011). Hubbard (2009) concludes with a synthesis of the present practices of
reporting sustainability resources presented by the researchers and notes that the
sustainability reports most of the times are not integrated with the conventional economic
oriented more towards management needs and less towards the needs of other interested
parties involved in this process, focusing more on testing the concepts and theories than on
supporting the managers and also focusing on the environment problems and less on social
problems (Hubbard, 2009).
On an instrumental and strategic level, the companies have the control over the
implementation of the policies concerning green strategies. However, the main impediment
resides in the lack of integration of the economic, social and environmental performance
improvement programs. Therefore, the use of the Balanced Scorecard (BSC) methodology
for the integration of the social and environmental management in the general management
of a company becomes a sustainability catalyst. Many specialists tackled the issue of the
Sustainability Balanced Scorecard (SBSC) in their research (Radcliffe, 1999; Bieker, et al.,
2001a; Bieker, et al., 2001b; Bieker, et al., 2001c; Dyllick şi Schaltegger, 2001; Epstein şi
Wisner, 2001; Epstein şi Roy, 2001; Orssatto, et al., 2001, quoted by Figge, 2002)
discussing methodologies for corporate sustainability management directed towards value
with Balanced Scorecard. These lead to the integration of the three pillars of sustainability
in a unitary management system (Figge, 2002).
In order to answer the hypothesis proposed in this research on the relation between social,
economic and environmental performance a multiple regression model was used. This
model combines the three aspects of performance proving its functionality on the basis of
the positive relation between them. Based on this model, we tested the influence that the
independent variable of the Gross Domestic Product per capita (GDPC) and the
Environmental Performance Index (EPI) have on the Global Competitiveness Index (GCI)
on a worldwide level.
In practice, public and private agencies of environmental management use environmental
indicators to summarize and assess the ecological processes (environmental performance,
the allocation of restoration efforts and the establishment of the benchmarks of social and
environmental criteria). Yale Center for Environmental Law and Policy (YCELP) and the
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN) at Columbia
University in collaboration with the World Economic Forum and Joint Research Centre of
the European Commission have elaborated and calculated the Environmental Performance
Index as a response to information technology developments and data-driven decisions that
have transformed every corner of society, from the business environment to the green
environment. EPI includes a set of environmental indicators, which are calculated for the
problematic areas and which should become factors of great interest in political decisions in
every country (Cimpoeru, et al., 2011).
The work is organized as follows: a short introduction, followed by notions on the concept
of sustainable development and SBSC as integrating system for the sustainable
performance. Then we will present the methodology for research with reference to the data
collection process, the research method and we present the framework of the research
hypothesis. Further on, there will be a section that makes reference to the results of the
empirical study, obtained based on the analysis of the correlations between synthetic factors
of organizational change (GDPC and EPI) and the social performance (GCI), and then,
based on the empirical researches, we conclude that the main factor for a sustainable
economy is the Sustainability Balanced Scorecard.

1. Sustainability – the link between economic, social and environmental performances
The term „sustainable development” or „sustainability” first appeared when the objective of
public order recorded advances for a continual economic growth (Ahmad, et al., 2011). The
UN report, known as Brundtland Report defined the sustainable development as „ways of
progress which should satisfy the needs and aspirations of the present generation without
compromising the possibility for the future generations to satisfy their needs” (WCED,
1987, p. 43). From the point of view of the companies, sustainability must be understood as
„the capacity to act in an unitary fashion through the renewal of the assets, the creation and
delivery of products and services that answer to the expectations of the present society, the
attraction of successive generations, the contribution to a sustainable environment, winning
the trust and support of the clients, shareholders and of the community in which the entity
performs its activity” (Caraiani, et al., 2010b, p. 80).
The governments, civil society, scholars, communities, companies and international
associations must get involved in formulating and implementing solid environmental
development and protection policies, together with the relevant research, the education,
educating, raising awareness and changing social values as stipulated in the Earth Charter
for supporting the sustainable development actions (Ahmad, et al., 2011).
Bansal (2005) presents three principles of sustainable development as a mandatory, but not
sufficient condition for its achievement. The principle of ecologic integrity ensures that the
human activities do not lead to the erosion of the earth, air or water resources. The growth
of population combined with excessive consumption, the continuous pollution and the
exhaustion of the natural resources threaten the integrity of the environment (WCED,
1987). The principle of social equity ensures that all the members of the society have equal
access to the resources and opportunities. The principle of economic prosperity promotes a
reasonable standard of life through the productive capacity of organizations and individuals
in society and implies the manufacture and delivery of goods and services which will help
raising the standard of living in the world. Economic development can become sustainable
only if those three principles are simultaneously complied (Bansal, 2005).
The companies are considered the heart of economic growth by generating added value.
Most of the population in every country works in these companies, and, willingly or not,
their actions do not always have benefic effects on the environment. As a consequence,
acknowledging these aspects places an emphasis on rethinking the strategies which should
allow them to compete on different markets, to evaluate the social and environmental
impact generated by their activities and to quickly and efficiently adapt to the changes in
the environment in which they operate.
The concept of sustainable performance is promoted as a communication instrument
between the main factors involved in the general social, economic and environmental
balance on different complexity levels of the informational fields. As the need for
sustainable practices in the business becomes clearer, sustainability reporting offers real
values to those who have the responsibility of evaluating the current financial position of
the companies and anticipating their future performances (Caraiani, et al., 2009).
Sustainable performance is equal with the reunion of the three dimensions of performance:
the economic, the social and the environmental one. The economic performance contains all
the aspects of the economic interactions of the organization, including the traditional
indicators used in financial accounting, but also intangible elements which do not usually
organizations over the natural resources, including the ecosystems, earth, air and water. The
activity of most of the organizations that present social and environmental reporting is
certified by the environment management standards, such ISO 14001. The social dimension
of sustainable development refers to the impact of the entity impact on the social systems in
which it operates. The social performance can be measured through analyzing the impact of
the organizations on the stakeholders on a local, national and global level. Social
performance indicators can influence the intangible assets of the organization, such as
human capital and reputation (Caraiani, et al., 2010b).
2. The Sustainability Balanced Scorecard – integrating system of sustainable
performance
The maximization of profit does not represent the main objective of companies. These have
started to move towards obtaining sustainable performance which, including the social and
environment needs, contributes to the ongoing character of the activity. On an ever
increasing basis, performance is measured next to the financial indicators, with the help of
non-financial indicators which should mirror the aspects regarding safety, environment and
the employees of the entity. Safety, society and the global performance, conformity, risk
management, governance or performance evaluation are approached through the new
management systems which the entities are implementing now as a basis for responsible
reporting, for creating both current information and indexes for the future (Caraiani, et al.,
2010a).
Companies have started to react and rethink the organizational change using modern
management tools. Although social and environment management is not always directed
towards the economic success of the company (Figge, 2002), many researches and scholars
try to raise awareness among high level managers that sustainability must be seen as a
primordial necessity of humankind. The company’s orientation towards sustainability
acknowledges its responsibilities towards different interested parties and adopts the
activities, methods and tools which allow the improvement of the social and environmental
performance. (Perrini and Tencati, 2006). In short term programs, aspects of risk
improvement, the application of new control standards of activities and management
integrity can be included, while in long term programs the improvement of risk
management activities and of performance quality is intended (Lungu, et al., 2012).
Research in accountancy tried to obtain and evaluate both the leadership measures and also
new forms of organizational responsibility through the perspective of accounting systems,
which supports the possibilities of representing and communicating, transmitting official
information in the interactions of the organizations with society and its physical
environment (Gray, 2007).
Johnson and Kaplan (1987, quoted by Elijido-Ten, 2010) debated the critic concerning “the
rise and fall of management accounting” and proposed more contemporary concepts for
management accounting, including the systems for measuring the multi-perspective
strategic performance (SPMS). In 1992 they introduced the most common model of SPMS,
today known as Balanced Scorecard (BSC). Their model of BSC promotes translating the
organizational mission and strategies into objectives (Rey-Marston and Neely, 2010).

BSC is based on the theory of interested parties, which connects the specific interests of all
the parties involved in the company: employees, stakeholders, clients, suppliers, regulation
organisms, local communities and explains the organizational performance according to
their expectancies (Hubbard, 2009).
Performance measurement and objectives develop from targets established in each of the
four perspectives: financial, client, internal processes and development and growth (ElijidoTen, 2010). A well defined strategy represents the basis of the key performance factors
which have the highest influence on the achievement of the basic strategic objectives
(measured with result indicators) identified for all perspectives. The goal of BSC is to
formulate a hierarchical system of strategic objectives for all four perspectives, derived
from the business strategy and aligned with the financial perspective (Figge, 2002; ElijidoTen, 2010).
Performance measurement involves setting the objectives for each perspective and the
specific key performance indicators for achieving these objectives. The balance is
considered the main principle which characterizes BSC and the four perspectives must be
taken into consideration simultaneously for ensuring performance and success on a long
term (Dumitrana and Caraiani, 2010).
Specific indicators developed depending on the corporate information needs permanently
monitor the performance tendencies of an organization. Their number and types must be
defined depending on real corporate needs and support the decisional process management
(Perrini and Tencati, 2006).
Balanced Scorecard is a complex performance model and much more than a set of
distinctive indicators, grouped in four perspectives. The causality relations between the
performance objectives are represented by strategic maps (Kaplan and Norton, 2004).
Companies develop a social and environmental impact perspective and use such tools as
BSC in an extended form, connected with their business strategy (Jones, 2011).
Sustainability Balanced Scorecard helps overcoming the deficiencies of the social and
environmental management systems’ conventional approaches.
In specialized literature three ways of developing SBSC were determined, such as: (1)
through the incorporation of the sustainability measures in the initial framework of the four
BSC perspectives; (2) adding a fifth “sustainability” or “social and environmental”
perspective to the BSC or (3) developing a scorecard for distinct sustainability (Figge,
2002).
Regardless of the method used, the extension from BSC to SBSC must represent a
privileged way for allowing a global steering of performance; the key to success in
achieving this resides in a well defined strategy and the choice of the indicators. The choice
option is at the discretion of the company, the choice varying from the industry sector in
which they operate, the size of the company and its specific. SBSC should include results
indicators – a posteriori, which are designed to determine whether strategic objectives have
been achieved and leading indicators – a priori, performance generators which allow
pinpointing the ways for achieving the objectives (Dumitrana and Caraiani, 2010). It is
notable the fact that these indicators are connected by intra-perspective and interperspective cause and effect chains, the result indicators from a certain perspective can
become action indicators from another.

easy to quantify and can be divided into two categories (Maas and Bouma, 2004, quoted
Castro and Chousa, 2006): internal indicators, such as education and training, safety and
healthcare, employees retention, satisfaction level, and external indicators such as sponsors,
voluntary action, social investments and the involvement of the interested parties. Both
categories can influence corporate performance (Castro and Chousa, 2006).
The modality presented in this case study is introducing the sustainability measures in the
four BSC standard perspectives as can be seen in figure no. 1 and table no. 1. The
strategically relevant social and environmental aspects are integrated in the four perspectives
through basic strategic elements for which the objectives were set, the result indicators and
action indicators were selected (Kaplan and Norton, 2001). Environmental/social aspects,
thus, become a part of the conventional BSC and are integrated automatically in its cause
and effect connections and hieratically oriented towards financial perspective and successful
conversion of the business strategy (Figge, 2002).
BSC

SOCIAL

ECONOMIC

ENVIRON
MENTAL

SBSC
Figure no. 1: Transform the conventional BSC in SBSC
In our opinion, the introduction of the social and environmental aspects into the four
perspectives of the conventional BSC is better perceived by all the interested parties
involved, at a strategically level and at an operational level. (Figge, 2002) argues that
adopting SBSC with the sustainability scorecard should be decided only after the first two
versions were achieved for standard BSC.
Sustainable performance management needs a reporting framework which connects social
management to the environment and the competitive business strategy of the company and
which integrates social and environmental information in the sustainable corporate reports.
The reconsideration of the relations between SBSC, as a strategic management instrument
and reporting the sustainable performance facilitates this aspect (Lungu, et al., 2011).
The strategic concerning the sustainable development adopted by companies must ensure
an internal environment favorable to the maintenance of the competitive level and
development, by improving labor conditions and increasing the living standard in a
favorable external environment, by involving the company in actions concerning the
community welfare, the development of a system of local and zonal partnerships for the
purpose of creating a stimulating business climate, based on the congruence of the joint
interest objectives and the increase of competitiveness as an essential qualitative condition
on the long term (Miron, et al., 2011).
Table no. 1: General model of SBSC
Financial Perspective
Standard Sales growth
BSC
Cost-effective sales
Cost-effective assets
Cost-effective capital
Social

The frequency of loss
caused by wasted time
Sponsorship
Community relations
Environ Working license
mental
Reputation
Brand value
CUSTOMER PERSPECTIVE
Standard
BSC

Social

Environ
mental

Market share
No. of new clients
Product rate of return
Damages
Order time cycle
Reliability of the delivery
General satisfaction of the
client
Attracting the clients by
promoting
“green”
politics
Key materials used/ unit
Product quality

Internal processes’ perspective
Productivity
Working force turnover
Medium production per unity
Working capital/ sales
Use of capacities
Education and training
Suppliers’ social performance
Reliability of the supply
Accidental leakages
CO2/Nitrogen emissions
Used energy/ unity
LEARNING AND GROWING
PERSPECTIVE
New products developed
Penetrating new markets
R& D expenses/ sales
Training spending/sells
Investments/ active total
Receptivity
Philanthropic investments/ income
or profit
Voluntary actions of the employees
Innovation

Standard
BSC

Social

Environ
mental

Standard
BSC

Social

Environ
mental

Wastewater reusing

Source: Adapted by Hubbard, 2009; Hsu şi Liu, 2010

variables measured at a microeconomic level are to be found at a macroeconomic level too,
only determined at a general level. Implementing SBSC in the companies’ management
leads to success, competitiveness and the effects of this are mirrored in the key indicators of
sustainable performance. Thus, the companies’ optimum results determine the general
progress of the sustainable economy.
3. Research methodology and data bases
The aim of this paper is the correlation of macroeconomic vision about the three pillars of
sustainable development: economic performance – represented by GDP per capita;
environmental performance represented by the environmental performance index EPI and
the reflection of this liaisons in the global competitiveness index GCI, which is associated
with social performance. The research is justified by the impact of determining factors over
the social development required for economic progress and sustainable prosperity of the
countries around the world.
We introduce a hypothesis: The size of social performance in X country is correlated
positively with the synthetic factors of sustainable organizational changes (economic
performance and environmental performance measured at macroeconomic level for the
respective country).
We present a comparative analysis using a statistical-econometric methodology. Parameters
statistics that measure the symmetry, the normality of the distribution, the correlation
between different statistical data are obtained by regression function. Processing dates for
the analyzed indicators are calculated by running Eviews software.
Considering the concepts presented, we can develop a multiple regression model that
highlights the dependencies between GCI and its influence factors in 116 countries.
In the economic opinion, the model remains a usual instrument for solving certain general
problems, and the modeling represents either a set of means for discovering the real nature
of the problems of the economic theory, or a simplified image of the relationships between
the economic variables, close to the structural-anatomical representation of the economic
processes (defining the variables) and the physiological description (relationships,
limitations, operating mechanisms). The statistical model reveals supplementary the phase
character of the model concept, respective, as a link in an integrated learning process, being
itself composed from the hypothesis, the schematic representation of a process
(phenomenon), statistical testing of the formulated hypotheses on the reality and starting
over the process in a general theory. The econometric model is represented as an
aggregation of the mathematical, economical and statistical models, opening the horizon of
multidisciplinary collaborations (Săvoiu, et al., 2011).
The series of data necessary for estimating the values of the model are cross-sectional data
for 2010 (data collected at one point for a number of statistical units), collected as follows:
global competitiveness index (variable marked with by GCI), GDP per capita (variable
marked with GDPC) and environmental performance index (variable marked with EPI).

3.1. Indicators of sustainability
The United Nations Conference on Environmental and Development held in Rio de Janeiro
in 1992 highlighted the goal of sustainable development indicators, used to collect, process
and use the information to make better decisions, to smarter direct political options,
measuring progress and monitoring feedback mechanisms (Agenda 21, Chapter 40, as
quoted by Ramos and Caeiro, 2010).
Studies from the specialized literature have addressed different types of indicators for
evaluating sustainable performance or its three aspects – economic, social and
environmental (e.g. indicators of National Accounts - gross domestic product (GDP), GDP
per capita, the Dow Jones Sustainability Index, Environmental Performance Index (EPI),
the Climate Change Performance Index (CCPI), the Human Development Index (HDI), the
Global Competitiveness Index (GCI), etc.).
GCI measures the national competitiveness, defined as a set of institutions, policies and
factors that determine the level of country’s productivity, and the level of productivity in its
turn determines the level of sustainable prosperity that can be reached by an economy. The
12 critical factors called competitiveness pillars according to which GCI is determined are:
institutions, infrastructure, macroeconomic environment, health and primary education,
higher education and training of human resources, market efficiency, labor market
efficiency, financial market development, technological training, market sizing, business
sophistication and innovation. These factors are grouped in three categories – basic factors,
efficiency growth factors and innovation factors, based on which the index is being
calculated. The values of the index are situated between 1 and 7 and can be found in the
Global Competitiveness Report prepared by the World Economic Forum Center. The report
identifies a series of advantages, and also impediments to the national growth, thus offering
a unique comparative evaluation instrument for the public and private sectors and also for
the academic environment and the civil society. The report is available on the website of
the World Economic Forum.
(http://www3.weforum.org/docs/ WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2010-11.pdf).
GDP per capita is the gross domestic product divided by the average population per year.
GDP is the sum of gross value added of all resident producers in the economy, plus any
product taxes and minus any subsidies which are not included in the value of the products.
It is calculated without making deductions for depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion
and degradation of natural resources. The international comparisons are ensured by the
statistics of the World Bank on its website
(http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD). The values are expressed in
thousands of U.S. dollars (the imported data were divided by 1000).
Although both indicators expressed, in theory, productivity, in our study we differentiate
the GDP per capita as a strictly economic measure, while the broad sphere of GCI focuses it
as social measure. Productivity leads to economic wellbeing, but welfare is only part of the
total welfare (education, health, culture, security, etc.).
EPI measures the environmental performance of a country's policies and classifies 163
countries on the basis of 25 performance indicators organized into ten categories of
policies. These indicators offer aggregate information, expressed in a governmental scale,

was based on a team of expert researchers of Yale University for identifying the most
adequate indicators in each category of policies and in some cases for assisting with data
processing, making a real collaboration effort with the science world (Cimpoeru, et al.,
2011).
EPI is focused on two very important environmental objectives: mitigating environmental
stress factors for the human health and promoting the strengthening of eco-systems together
with a healthy management of the natural resources. In order to make the 25 indicators
compatible, each measure was converted to a proximity-to-target measure with a range
from 0 to 100. The values of the indicator can be accessed on the website
http://epi2010.yale.edu/.
3.2. Research method
Based on the quantitative data, we have developed a multiple regression model which
highlights the existing dependencies between the global competitiveness index GCI (the
dependent variable) and two macroeconomic performance indicators, GDPC and EPI as
independent variables. The regression model has the following form:
yi = a+ b*xi + c*zi, i = 1,…,n
where:
yi is GCI, at the level of 2010;
xi is GDP per capita, at the level of 2010;
zi represents EPI in the year 2010;
a, b, c are the regression model parameters;
n is the number of countries considered in the analysis.
We have tested our study hypothesis by applying the multiple regression model on a
database comprising 116 countries grouped in alphabetical order, for which I have found
values for all three variables considered in the study.
3.3. Descriptive Analysis of data series
In the descriptive analysis we follow the indicators relating to the general distributions of
characteristics: minimum value, maximum value, amplitude, arithmetic mean, standard
deviation, asymmetry coefficient (Skewness) and the flattening coefficient (Kurtosis). The
Skewness indicator is a statistical parameter that measures the lack of symmetry. The value
of this indicator close to 0 indicates the existence of a normal distribution of the analyzed
data series. Significantly different values from 0 (positive or negative) reflect the degree of
distancing from the normal distribution. The Kurtosis indicator measured if the elements of
a series are closer or more distanced from the normal distribution. Its high value indicates
that the data has a distinct peak compared to the average.

We can say that for GCI and EPI data series, the indicators shown by Histogram and Stats
show a normal distribution, and for GDPC it is notable the lack of normal distribution of
this data series, that suggest a wider range of values (table no. 2).
Table no. 2: Statistical indicators of data series
GCI
4.140086
4.065000
5.630000
2.730000
0.649269
0.416586
2.582398

Mean
Median
Maximum
Minimum
Std. Dev.
Skewness
Kurtosis

GDPC
13.29840
4.586350
108.9210
0.192100
19.06695
2.271143
8.991967

EPI
60.22500
60.75000
93.50000
33.70000
12.03165
0.114811
2.742172

The graph (figure no. 2) shows that all three series have a linear trend, which suggests that
once GCI increases or decreases, GDPC and EPI have the same
trend.
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

25

50
G CI

75
G DPC

100
EPI

Figure no. 2: Series of date GCI, GDPC and EPI
Whereas, in reality, the dependence between the dependent variable GCI and the
independent variables GDPC and EPI is stochastic, and only three factors have been taken
into account in determining the GCI (although the dependencies are more numerous), the
econometric model is given by:

yi  a  b  xi  c  zi   i , i  1,..., n
where ε is the error of significance (specification), which is a random variable (stochastic)
that has some probabilistic properties, given the inaccurate relations between the variables.

between the dependent variable GCI and the independent variables GDPC and EPI (figure
no. 3).
7
6
5
4

1.2
0.8
0.4
0.0
-0.4
-0.8
-1.2

3
2

25

50
R e s id u a l

75
A c tu a l

100
F it t e d

Figure no. 3: The actual, adjusted values of the series GCI series and residues series
Estimating the parameters through the method of least squares (OLS) for the proposed
model, the relationship between the dependent variable - global competitiveness index
(GCI) and the independent variables - domestic product per capita (GDPC) and the
environmental performance index (EPI), we obtain the following form for the regression
equation (table no. 3):
GCI=2.8270+0.0199*GDPC+0.0174*EPI
Table no. 3: The results of the estimation of parameters of regression model
Dependent Variable: GCI
Method: Least Squares
Date: 01/22/12 Time: 21:37
Sample: 1 116
Included observations: 116
GCI=C(1)+C(2)*GDPC+C(3)*EPI
Coefficient
C(1)
C(2)
C(3)
R-squared
Adjusted R-squared
S.E. of regression
Sum squared resid.
Log likelihood
Vol. XIV • No. 32 • June 2012

2.827055
0.019925
0.017402
0.658920
0.652883
0.382527
16.53497
-51.60633

Std.
t-Statistic
Error
0.203791
13.87235
0.002264
8.800614
0.003588
4.850336
Mean dependent var.
S.D. dependent var.
Akaike info criterion
Schwarz criterion
Durbin-Watson stat

Prob.
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
4.140086
0.649269
0.941488
1.012702
The determination ratio (0.6589) shows that the influence of the independent variables
GDPC and EPI over the dependent variable GCI is 65.89%. The adjusted determination
ratio (0.6528) expresses the quality of the variables included in the model.
3.4. The testing of econometric model
3.4.1. Testing the meaning of the model parameters.
The probabilities associated with the t-Student test for independent variables coefficient are
below the threshold 1% for GDPC, EPI and the free term, so it rejects the null hypothesis
that the slope of regression is insignificantly different from 0, these exogenous variables
have a significant influence on the dependent variable GCI.
We are testing the significance of parameters of the regression model by the Wald test
(table no. 4). It is noted that the associated probabilities are 0.0, Fisher and Hi-square values
are very high, so the parameters are significantly different from 0.
Table no. 4: Wald Test
Wald Test:
Equation: GCI
Statistical test
F-statistic
Chi-square

Value
104728.5
104728.5

Null Hypothesis Summary:
Normalized Restriction (= 0)
-1 + C(2) + C(3)

df
(1.113)
1

Probability
0.0000
0.0000

Value
-0.962673

Std. Err.
0.002975

3.4.2. Testing multi-co-linearity
In order to test the presence of the co-linearity phenomenon, we will apply the Klein
criterion. In the correlation matrix for the variables of the regression model (table no. 5) we
note that the correlation ratio between the two explanatory variables is less than the ratio of
determination (0.5631 < 0.6589). We conclude that the co-linearity phenomenon is not
present, so the two explanatory variables are properly introduced in the model.
Table no. 5: Correlation matrix of the model variables
Variables
GCI
GDPC
EPI

464

GCI
1.000000
0.766753
0.652029

GDPC
0.766753
1.000000
0.563197

EPI
0.652029
0.563197
errors of self correlation
We apply the Durbin-Watson test for testing errors of self correlation, for which we have
defined two hypotheses:
H0: ƍ = 0, there is no self correlation at residue series level
H1: ƍ ≠ 0, the residue series presents self correlation of the first degree
The inferior, respective, superior limits for the DW statistics (α = 0.01, k = 2) are 1.5,
respectively 1.58. We calculate du < DW < 4 - dl and get 1.58 < 2.0447 < 2.50. It results
that the null hypothesis is accepted, so there is no significant linear correlation of the first
degree at residue series level.
3.4.4. Testing the residuals variance
The residuals variance is explicated of the White test. Heteroskedasticity, the lack of equal
dispersions, was verified by analyzing the determination coefficient (R² = 31.02). The value
obtained is higher than the one existed in table, result that there is no heteroskedasticity
between the model errors (table no. 6).
Table no. 6: White Test
White Heteroskedasticity Test:
10.13201
F-statistic
31.02563
Obs*R-squared
Test Equation:
Dependent Variable: RESID^2
Method: Least Squares
Date: 01/29/2012
Sample: 1 116
Included observations: 116
Variable
Coefficient
C
0.136288
GDPC
-0.002530
GDPC^2
0.000109
EPI
0.003393
EPI^2
-5.92E-05
R-squared
0.267462
Adjusted R-squared
0.241065
S.E. of regression
0.188856
Sum squared resid
3.958991
Log likelihood
31.30398
Durbin-Watson stat
2.060510

Vol. XIV • No. 32 • June 2012

Probability
Probability

Std. Error
t-Statistic
0.344800
0.395266
0.002670
-0.947786
3.11E-05
3.515915
0.011481
0.295487
9.43E-05
-0.627418
Mean dependent var
S.D. dependent var
Akaike info criterion
Schwarz criterion
F-statistic
Prob(F-statistic)

0.000000
0.000003

Prob.
0.6934
0.3453
0.0006
0.7682
0.5317
0.142543
0.216785
-0.453517
-0.334828
10.13201
3.5. Results and discussions
The obtained results confirm the hypothesis stated in the research and we interpret the
regression equation thus: if GDPC increases by $ 1,000 (these series date were divided by
1,000), then GCI increases by 0.0199; if EPI increase by 1 then GCI increases by 0.0174.
Economic and ecologic growth in correlation with the increase in competitiveness generates
a sustainable economy. The nucleus of economy being the company, we affirm that if the
former utilizes sustainable strategies in order to overcome the social, economic and
environmental impact of the activity performs, and in order to ensure profitability, then
SBSC becomes the key to strategic organizational change.
The determination ratio (R-squared) has a sufficiently high value, almost 65.89% from the
GCI variation is explained by the variation of GDPC and EPI factors. The adjustable
determination ratio (0.6528) shows the quality of the variables used in the model. The
statistical link between the endogenous variable and the exogenous variables is good, which
shows that the variables are properly chosen in the model.
The analysis of the regression model presented cannot be considered complete without
mentioning the fact that a significant value of the free term means that the factors which
have not been included in the model affect the value of GCI. The value of the free term
reveals that the variables which were not included in the econometric model have, as a
whole, a positive effect on the evolution of GCI.
The validity of this model can be sustained on account of the low values of probability, the
value of standard errors and the applied statistical tests.
In order to perform a forecast of the GCI variable, we resized the data series using a sample
of observations from 1 to 110, from the observation 111 considering forecast (figure no. 4).
The forecast is sufficiently accurate, because the root mean squared error is low (0.3707)
taking into account that the analyzed sample is quite large, and the Theil coefficient is less
than 1 (0.2872). The positive relationship between the components of the studied model is
strengthened by this forecast and it is useful in discovering and following the evolution of
an indicator in a given context.
7

Forecast: GCIF
Actual: GCI
Forecast sample: 1 110
Included observations: 110

6
5

Root Mean Squared Error
Mean Absolute Error
Mean Abs. Percent Error
Theil Inequality Coefficient
Bias Proportion
Variance Proportion
Covariance Proportion

4
3

0.370785
0.287264
6.989439
0.044275
0.000089
0.084864
0.915047

2
25

50

75

100

GCIF

Figure no. 4: Forecast for GCI variable based on the current values

Our research claims that the countries which take into account the social and environmental
aspects in their economic and governmental policies are more competitive and more
innovative than the others. They have access to a range of information before the others and
are better prepared to face the unforeseen aspects which may negatively impact on people’s
lives.
The results of the empirical study, performed by estimating the parameters of the multiple
regression model, using the least squares method, reflects the positive influence of GDPC
and EPI on GCI. This model combines the social, economic and environmental aspects in a
positive relationship and offers a direction towards strategic organizational change to all the
interested parties, leading to economic, social and environmental welfare.
A cleaner environment and a solid economic base ensures the fundamentals of human
development – health, education, culture, security, and their simultaneous action guided by
sustainable development principles will ensure the generation of tomorrow that we of today
have acted wisely in obtaining performance.
The model is functional for companies, too, because their performances set the pace of
economy, their objective being to create long-term value. A sustainability-oriented
company is fully aware of its responsibilities towards the various interested parties. The
adoption of an integrated system of management which include the aspects of sustainable
performance like SBSC can only confirm that the preoccupation of a company for overall
performance will be reflected in the sustainable performance of a country. Companies do
not have to fear that the adoption of a system oriented towards sustainability will
necessarily result in higher costs, if the strategy is well defined, monitored and measures by
a high performance management system, but they can be sure that they will achieve long
term benefits.
Our research proves the existence of a positive relation between the indexes for sustainable
performance, which is so useful at macroeconomic level, and also at microeconomic level,
because the integration of economic, social and environmental aspects on the long term in
business strategies will help companies to maintain their global competitiveness, and,
implicitly, the sustainable economy. Building a balanced SBSC model using a given
frameworks will determine managers to think strategically in developing the sustainable
organizational change. Moreover, including social and environmental indicators in the BSC
is an answer to the current economic requirements. Just as macroeconomic indexes, such as
GDPC, EPI and GCI are instruments which have proven their usefulness in time for
measuring sustainable performance, similarly SBSC is the main instrument for measuring
the sustainable performance of companies.
Acknowledgements
This work was co financed from the European Social Fund through the Sectoral
Operational Program Human Resources Development 2007-2013, project number
POSDRU/107/1.5/S/77213„ Ph.D. for a career in interdisciplinary economic research at the
European standards”.


