improving the living standards of the residents. A survey of the benefits of tourism in its
relationship with the environment and local communities evinces the following:
• the revenues from tourism-generated taxes can be used to improve community services
and facilities (Manda, 2007);
• stimulates the development of economic activities such as agriculture, fishing and
handicrafts (Negru, 2005);
• stimulates the development of new and improved cultural and commercial facilities,
which can be used by both local residents and tourists;
• allows the collection of funds needed to preserve natural, archaeological and historical
monuments and, above all, it contributes to improving the quality of the environment
(Giaoutzi, 2006);
• stimulates the social changes occurring as a result of economic development and broader
communication framework (Gillespie and Cousins, 2001).
1. Tourism planning
Tourism planning (Manente, Minghetti and Mingotto, 2014) pursues the establishment of
ways of achieving social-economic benefits for the society, to the end of attaining a
sustainable development of tourism by protecting the environment and the local culture.
When planning, one should take into consideration all the components of tourism such as
tourist attractions and activities, transport, infrastructure elements and the institutional
system. That is why local communities build their tourism development and assertion
strategies on objectives and measures meant to implement them. Here are some of the most
important objectives:
• To modernize basic infrastructure and all communication means, local communities
having in view the improvement of infrastructure, transport and communication means
throughout the area, the modernization and development of utility networks;
• To promote the image of the local community and to consolidate its cultural,
multicultural and spiritual identity by protecting, restoring and using to the best the tourism
heritage of the local community; to support cultural vocation and promote local values and
traditions on a national, European and international level;
• To improve and diversify services within the local community by upgrading the urban
framework to the end of improving the quality of the residents’ life to European standards. It
is a strategy achievable by most efficiently using the human resources involved in the
hospitality industry; by creating minimum conditions for local residents to have access to
growing permanent sources of income, a prerequisite for the improvement of the living
conditions; by building a sport infrastructure needed to develop mass and performance sport
activities; by promoting a special policy on the rehabilitation and consolidation of the existing
housing stock;
• To ensure the protection and conservation of the natural and anthropic resources in keeping
with the requirements of tourism sustainable development by improving the quality of surface
waters and of drinking water; by improving the quality of the atmosphere and of the
environment; by preserving and extending the network of protected areas, parks, monuments of
nature, historical monuments, green areas in the local community and the neighboring zones; by
educate the population in the environment protection spirit (Coroș, 2015);
• Alongside positive effects, tourism also has negative economic outcomes. For instance,
a growing demand for farm produce could affect the local population, since a too great
demand for such products could lead to shortages (produce exhaustion, scarcity for the
population). Local traditional cuisine could undergo undesirable changes due to the
emergence of international cuisine.
By virtue of “necessity” of quick arrangements, fertile farmland along coasts, close to
beaches and river deltas could be used. The growing number of those working in tourism, in
a certain area, can lead to a drop in certain productions of the area or of the country of
destination.
Another category of effects are the social ones. The receiving population suffers both positive
and negative effects when they come in contact with unknown people (tourists), with a
different mentality, other preoccupations and other life prospects. Among the positive
outcomes, worth mentioning are the differentiation of social structure by means of passing
from work in agriculture to work in the service industry, modernisation of agriculture,
development of handicraft production (due to the tourists’ interest in the customs and culture
of the population in the visited area) and, last but not least, a smaller differentiation of
incomes. Another positive effect is family modernisation as a result of a new status of women
in the traditional peasant families and liberal parents-children relationships. Tourism has as
effect also the broadening of the thinking horizon of the inhabitants of the receiving areas: a
change in the ethnic attitude and the decrease of national-type preconceptions. In general, a
person in a receiving area is pleased with everything new, curious to try things others have
already tried. This does not always have positive consequences on their lives or on the life of
the society where they live. From this point of view, the social outcomes of tourism are not
only positive but also negative. Worth mentioning among them are:
• the development of consumption-related attitudes through social pathology phenomena
(prostitution, alcohol, drugs, delinquency etc.),
• the disintegration of families due to the growing number of divorces and abusive sexual
freedom;
• the polarization of population as a result of the disproportionate increase of incomes,
the enrichment of those who turns the traditional economy into tourist services and greater
earning opportunities without improving the activity.
The last category of tourism effects is that of cultural ones. Anthropic attractions are
important in attracting tourists and developing this sector. That is why one of the social
effects refers to the expansion of regional culture by developing folk art, artistic ensembles,
museum network etc. Also a positive effect is the introduction of modern architecture, of
safer buildings in the rural area. These buildings should make the best of local architecture
and of traditional building materials. The tourist receiving countries have tried to attract ever
more visitors by laying stress on cultural objectives and by making the best of natural as well
as anthropic resources. This has had both positive and negative consequences on the receiving
population and environment.
With each passing year the tourism industry has more and more influence on the world
economy. Tourism is an integrating element in the communication of people from different
cultures, people of different nationalities and religions. The number of tourists increases
annually and this leads to appearance of new types of tourism, new directions. This includes
a gastronomic tourism. During the travel a person stays in contact with the culture, history,
traditions, nature and characteristics of another country. Being in a gastronomic tour, he gets
to know the world through the other, unconventional way. The basis of gastronomic tourism
is a cognitive motivation of the trip.
Getting acquainted with the sights of the city, tourists at the same time want to know more
about the features of the national cuisine. Gastronomy is an important source of country’s
identity. Connection between gastronomy and tourism helps to increase the flow of tourists,
promotes prolongation of stay of tourists and increase profits. Connecting with the restaurant
business, tourism supports local producers and promotes the idea of the importance of highquality food. Local cuisine contributes to the tourists’ sense of place, sense of home, comfort
and safety. Gastronomic tourism is becoming more and more popular. People buy special
tours to become acquainted with the cuisine of any country in the world. In addition to
gastronomic tourism, there are special types of it like culinary tourism or food tourism and
agri-tourism that also give a great interest for research.

2. The phenomenon of culinary tourism and its development
The phenomenon of culinary tourism was known many centuries ago when merchants made
trips to foreign countries to purchase a variety of spices, wines and different beverages.
However, the term “culinary tourism” was introduced by Lucie Long, Professor of Ohio State
University in USA and since then it has been widely used during the formation of the tourism
product in many countries. The growing popularity of this type of tourism nowadays allows
us to suggest that culinary tourism will be one of the most promising and successful in few
years. But what makes culinary tourism attractive and popular to tourists? And what is the
difference between it and other kinds of tours?
First, culinary tourism gives the opportunity to present to tourists the richness of folk
traditions (Chase, Manning and Valliere, 2012). Getting acquainted with the local cuisine,
tourists will know the material culture of the country and the elements of folklore. During
degustation visitors are suggested to participate in different performances, enjoy local music
and dances, try on local costumes and visit traditional housing.
Secondly, culinary tourism provides an opportunity to involve tourists in the process of
cooking. Different kinds of local courses of national cuisine, master classes with participation
of the best chefs are offered to visitors during their tour.
The best fact about culinary tourism is that it does not depend on a season. According to data
of the International Association Of Culinary Tourism, those who prefer that kind of tours
does not waive various events of cultural activities – visits to various festivals as well as
museums and theatres. That is why travel companies quite often form special tours with
taking into account both factors – culture and culinary. This combination of food and
entertainment attracts thousands of tourists to food festivals and workshops every year (graph
no. 1)

200
France
150

Belgium
Austria

100

Italy
50

Switzerland

0
2012

2013

2014

2015

Graph no. 1: Graphic of tourists’ attendance of food festivals
and workshops in Europe (thousand people)
Source: Russian Tourism, 2015

As culinary tourism is still developing type of recreation, it demands new tactics and methods
of management for its extension around the world. According to Professor Craig
Schmantowsky (2014) there are several methods of promotion of culinary tourism:
•
•
•
•
•

Establishing particular destination as unique and memorable one;
Creating your special version of famous local dish;
Making tourists believe that they cannot try this product anywhere else;
Dining with Chef’s demonstrations;
Enlisting locals as culinary ambassadors.

Furthermore, Robson (2010) pointed 10 keys that can provide successful work of culinary
tourism industry not only in rural area but also in big communities and cities, they are:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Strong leadership;
Market ready or nearly market ready culinary products;
An integrated strategy;
Partnership and community based collaboration;
Financial support and performance measures;
Destinations with access to key origin markets;
Sufficient market intelligence;
Culinary tourism resources that are distinct to the region;
Destinations with multiple culinary tourism experiences;
An effective destination marketing organization.

As other types of tourism, culinary tourism relies on good promotion with a help of tourist
agencies. That is why eye catching and beautiful brochures and leaflets are the best ways to
attract potential visitors. Moreover, to those who prefer self-organization of culinary tour
there are many colourful and informative websites that can give all necessary information
(O’Neill, 2015; Peltier, 2015).

For example, one of the most popular culinary tours in the USA Taste Trail started its work
from the website and since the date of its founding Taste Trail attracts around $2 million in
PR attention annually.
Another good example of successful Internet promotion is Niagara Culinary Trail (USA).
The firm launched its website in 2008, which includes receipts defined as «Niagara Dishes»
designed to inspire locals to cook with ingredients from Niagara.
Thus can be said that culinary tourism needs strong support of tourist agencies and the
government because small entrepreneurs and farmers cannot provide their products with
expensive PR campaigns and advertising. Moreover, it is not easy to enter the market without
reputation of being well-known and responsible seller. Therefore, we can assume that
financial support from the state and the focused attention of travel agencies will open up new
prospects for culinary tourism.
Culinary tourism is often associated with agricultural tourism (also called agritourism or agritourism), that is a commercial enterprise on a working farm conducted for the enjoyment,
education, and/or active involvement of visitors (Budiasa and Ambarauaty, 2014). Tourists
are invited to know the way of production of organic food in rural area, to participate in the
process of cultivation or harvesting and to try environmentally friendly products. It should
be noticed, that agri-tourism contributes not only to the development of tourism in particular
area in general but also helps to solve important economic, cultural and environmental
problems (figure no. 1).

Suspension of urbanization, rural development

Agritourism

Solution of global environmental problems and nature protection
Revival of national culture, traditions, handicrafts
Development of infrastructure in rural areas
Solution to social issues (poverty, employment, etc.)
Extension of organic farming

Figure no. 1: The impact of agri-tourism on the solution to main economic, cultural
and environmental problems
Source: Allen, Gabe and McConnon, 2006

Thus comes the conclusion that both culinary tourism and its part – agritourism positively
affect the economic development of a region, they also help to raise awareness about
important environmental and ecological problems. Culinary tourism supports small rural
communities and revives cultural traditions, it offers unique chance to taste organic food and

familiar dishes or try something new.
3. Gastronomic tourism as a special tourism product
Gastronomic tour is a special kind of tourism activity that was made especially for tasting of
dishes which are typical for the local cuisine. Going on a trip, we usually set ourselves welldefined goals. The goal of gastronomic tours is to enjoy the features of cuisine of a particular
country. At the same time, this goal is not to try some rare, exotic dish or try countless dishes.
It is important to enjoy the local recipe, which for centuries absorbed the traditions and
customs of the local people, their culture of cooking. The gastronomic journey is a palette
with which the tourist can draw his vision of one or another country. Food reveals the mystery
of the spirit of the people, it helps to understand the mentality. Thus, gastronomic tourism is
a journey across countries and continents to explore the features of the local cuisine, culinary
traditions, with a purpose to enjoy a unique dish or product.
However, a gastronomic tour as a service is more than just a journey, because it is a well
thought out set of measures for the tasting of traditional dishes in a particular area, as well as
the specific ingredients with a special taste, which a tourist cannot find in other places in the
world found nowhere else in the world. This interest in the gastronomic tours is not only due
to the fact that people get bored of usual tours. People prefer this type of vacation because
often they are tired of the semi-finished products, because they want to enjoy their favorite
dish "in the original." It is similar to listening to jazz in a record all your life and one day go
to a live concert.
It is clear that first and foremost gastronomic tourism arouse interest among gourmets, for
whom good food is something more than just food. Secondly, gastronomic tourism attracts
people whose business is directly connected with the preparation and consumption of food restaurateurs, sommeliers, wine tasters, and restaurant critics. These people go to
gastronomic tour to raise the level of professional knowledge, learn something new and to
gain experience. Moreover, there are many programs providing many gastronomic master
classes for travelers from the best chefs who are happy to share the secrets of cooking of a
particular dish. And finally, also in pursuit of professional goals, representatives of tourist
companies go to these kinds of culinary trip because of the wish of expanding their business
and start selling gastronomic tours.
Gastronomic tours are divided into two types: rural (so-called “green”) and urban. Their
principal difference lies in the fact that, a tourist, going to the countryside, wants to try
ecologically clean product, without any additives. For example, “green” tours offer a picking
wild berries in the forest, fruit and vegetable at farms, hunting for truffles or wine road trips.
Urban gastronomic tour may include a visit to the candy factory or small sausage shop and then
the restaurant near it, where people have opportunity to try a product that was made in a factory.
In addition, there are tours that introduce no different dishes in one place, but one dish in
different areas. These are very famous French, Bulgarian wine tours, offering a walk through
the vineyards, grape harvest, wine tasting. There are cheese tours in Holland, Switzerland,
Italy, where you can taste the best varieties of cheeses and visit the cheese fair. Beer lovers
will remember all their lives beer tours in Germany, Austria, Czech Republic, Belgium and
not only for a great diversity of this drink, but also for visiting breweries, famous pubs and
festivals. It should be noted that almost every country has the potential for development of
gastronomic tourism, because each country has its own unique cuisine and traditions of
hospitality. Thus, in Japan tourists are offered to buy products for sushi, which then will be
prepared in front of the traveller be the best chefs. Pasta seems to be quite ordinary food that
is spread far outside Italy, but in the gastronomic journey tourist, trying to understand the
secret of taste of this dish, try a lot of it, compares it with each other, because it was cooked
according to the same formula, but by different chefs.
In Russia, the culinary tourism is rare: there is no well thought gastronomic routes and the
number of Russians who are ready to pay money for such a journey is very small. However,
more and more people realize the promise of this direction of travel industry.
Among the most important tourist destinations in gastronomic tourism in Europe are:
Gourmet Tours in France – it is a visit to wine cellars and wine museum in Bordeaux, wine
therapy, tasting of the most famous wine and cognac brands in the world, and also all famous
dishes of French cuisine, foie gras, confit and truffles. French Brittany offers routes for
tasting Breton cider and calvados, Cancale oysters and mussels. Lovers of different drinks
have to go to France on tour "The Way of French wines." The program of the tour includes
a visit to the wine cellars of Chablis in Burgundy, Alsace wineries, the centre of sparkling
wines in Reims, and of course, walking around Paris. You will be taught how to properly
store and taste the different wines, and also will be invited to crush the grapes all together.
Many companies organize trips to the annual celebration of Beaujolais Nouveau in France.
The real Spain is not in museums and cathedrals; it is in in cafes and restaurants, where
almost every Hispanic spends his evening with a glass of wine or a refreshing sangria. They
even have a special ceremony called «ir de tapas», the essence of which is to visit in one
night several bars and tasting in each of them the traditional wines and snacks. Not only in
Spain, but also in many other European countries gastronomic tours are devoted exactly to
wine (table no. 1).
Table no. 1: Leading countries in wine tourism in 2015
Leading countries of wine tourism
The number of arrivals
Wine production
Country
(mill)
(thousands of gallons)
France
83
42
USA
67
22
China
57,7
14,88
Spain
57,7
42,7
Italy
46,4
44,9
Source: Association for the Advancement of wine and gastronomic tourism in Russia, 2015

Spanish cuisine is diverse as Spain itself, and in every province of the country there is its
own gastronomy. The real paella can be enjoyed only in Valencia, gazpacho soup is prepared
according to the rules only in Andalusia, and ham – in Extremadura. And therefore it is
necessary to remember an important rule: not to be disappointed in your journey and taste
the "originals" of the culinary arts, you should make a good pre-study of the national cuisine
of the country in which you are going to.
Tour "Catalan Cuisine" takes place at the best places of Barcelona (the famous market "La
Boquezha", traditional bakeries, as well as the vineyards and wine cellars). "Culinary
Spain, has inherited a lot from the eastern invaders. Travelers are offered to taste "migas" (a
snack of fried bread crumbs), have a dinner in a traditional, rustic. One day is devoted to
baking bread and famous Andalusian pastries and cheese production. In October, you can
take a gastronomic tour "Spanish spices." You will take part in the harvest of saffron in the
province of La Mancha. Its flowers are picked by hand in the last two weeks of October, for
the saffron do not have time to lose its unique taste. In Extremadura you will learn how to
collect paprika, without which it is impossible to imagine spicy Spanish cuisine. In Tuscany
children of 8-14 years are introduced to the basics of healthy nutrition, a chef explain them
how to select fresh ingredients and cook according to the rules.
The culinary preferences
are shown in the graph no. 2.

of

tourists

traveling

to

the

gastronomic

tours

Graph no. 2: Percentage of tourists, traveling to the gastronomic tours,
and their preferences of national cuisine
Source: Top Hotels, 2015

Ireland is also able to entice gourmets: here every year for more than half a century take place
oyster festivals (Galway). During a holiday in pubs for beer served free appetizers: oysters
and the famous smoked salmon. Then comes the fun part of the holiday - Championship
oysters (Guinness World Oyster Championship). Participants should eat as many oysters as
they can in the shortest time. Judges evaluate the quantity and quality of open oyster’s flaps.
Germany is, first, beer and a variety of snacks to it, so the main place for gourmets is Bavaria.
(Munich with its world-famous beer festival "Oktoberfest").
Most gastronomic tours in Switzerland dedicated to cheese and chocolate. Among the most
visited places - the oldest coffee shop and wine market, the oldest confectionery "Sprüngli"
in Zurich and the world-famous restaurant of national cuisine "Arsenal". The gourmet tour
menu definitely will be fondue, roklett and fresh cheese, and in the schedule - a trip to the
cheese factory, chocolate factory and to a family of winemakers.
4. Strategic approaches to tourism sustainable development at local level
Specialised studies advance a strategy based on the close relation between tourism, economic
development level and environment quality. Thus, the tourism development strategies,
gastronomic tourism in our case, must be rigorously designed and implemented based on the
Gastronomic Tourism Development Action Programme – GTDAP. Such a programme
should be conceived so as to improve the gastronomic products offered to tourists, just as to
improve the economic performance of local businesses. A review of the evolution of
gastronomic tourism fully supports these considerations (table no. 2).
Table no. 2: The periods of tourism of the twentieth-century;
food, health and leisure influences
Era
>1914
Belle
époque
>1939
Inter-war
>1969
DTA*
>1989
Review of
DTA*
>2000+
Fusion
Cuisine

Food

Food and leisure

• Culinary imperialism
• The farm economy and its food

• Leisured classes
• Awareness of the dietary value

• Tea shops, eating out as an occasional

•
•
• Rationing
• Post-war overseas travel
• Global tourism
• Fusion cuisine
• Sustainable tourism
• Food tourism
• Experience economy

treat

• Austerity and affluence
• Nouvelle cuisine and fast food culture
• Culinary „celebrification”
• Sustainable food production

of food
Keeping fit
National Dietary Survey

*expansion of modern tourism (the Development of Tourism Act)
Source: Hall and Gősling, 2013, p.15

Two essential factors should be taken into account in order to efficiently implement such a
programme:
• Inter-organisational co-operation among local communities and private organisations.
Thus, a tourism development action programme urges the participants to act beyond their
own, restrictive possibilities and allows them to benefit from expertise and technologies
otherwise difficult to obtain;
• Supply of necessary resources because the financial constraints of the public sector,
project financing etc. pose real problems. So, in order to create or offer a tourist product, one
needs resources (financial and material), which are not available most of the time.
Therefore, a programme for the development of tourism on a local plane can be prepared and
implemented successfully as long as its implementation is planned and organized (table no. 3.

development of a sustainable tourism, the local communities can resort to or build external
relations with other communities). This type of relations can prove to be extremely prolific
under certain circumstances. Thus, the dynamics of the external relations of the local public
administration falls within a complex internal and international system, with two major
directions on which efforts are focused on an external plane. The first direction is to establish
a direct relation with foreign counterparts and international organizations. The second
direction derives from economic realities, namely relations with foreign companies based on
which joint ventures of local public interest are set up.
As for the external relations-related activity of the local executives, it is performed as a
parallel attribute of the local autonomy. It can be developed only in the interest of the local
community and within the limits of the competences set by the law. As an element of
reference concerning the regulation of the external relation-related activity of local councils,
art. 38, letter x of the local public administration law reads: “they decide, under the law, the
co-operation or association with Romanian or foreign legal entities, with non-government
organisations or other social partners in view of jointly financing and performing actions,
works, services or projects of local public interest; they decide on the commune or town
becoming twin with similar administrative-territorial units in other countries”. Therefore,
local communities have modalities, applicable strategies to develop local tourism. They only
need initiative, the necessary information and resources for such strategies to be implemented
(table no. 3).
Table no. 3: Typology of value added in gastronomy tourism
Main input
resource
Expected
tourist
behaviour
Principal
strategies

Collaborative
structures

Example
of initiatives

First order
Food production
resources

Second order
Resources in the
service sector

Third order
Entrepreneurial
resources

Enjoy the food

Understand the
food

Experience the
food

Exchange
knowledge about
the food

Higher revenues
through boosted
production and
marketing

Maintaining
revenues
through quality
and reinvention
of traditions

Offering new
products and
services to
tourists

Selling knowhow to
professionals

Crating new
structures and
service
Unchanged
organizations,
still localized
Opening
Culinary aspects in
production
Quality
plants and sites
regional promotion
standards
Campaigns for
Certification and Routes and trails
Visitor centres
particular products
branding
and museums
Regional food
Reinventing and
trademarks
commodification New events
Marketing food fairs of historical food based on tourism
Cooking classes
and food events
traditions
and holidays
Source: Hjalager and Greg, 2002, p.33
Enforced cooperation
between existing
organizations

Vol. 18 • Special Issue No. 10 • November 2016

Fourth order
Knowledge

Creating new
structures in a
global context

Research and
development
Media centres
Demonsration
5. Relations between tourism and the environment and the local communities where it
exists
The contribution tourism makes to social and economic effects consists of the fact that all
these are a natural, normal consequence of the act of tourism, as they do not presuppose
special efforts or measures; moreover, in most of the cases, these effects have higher values,
difficult to attain by other means. Noteworthy is the fact that tourism can fulfil its mission in
the best conditions when all tourist activities are performed at a high quality level.
The social, cultural and economic effects of tourism manifest themselves in two stages:
• the first stage is characterized by imitation and surprise,
• in the second stage tourism becomes an industrial and commercial activity.
A first positive economic effect of tourism refers to the growing demand for foodstuffs, which
leads to the increase of local production, to the learning of new relevant techniques and to a
mounting supply of such products, hence to zone autonomy in this respect. Likewise, the
local cuisine contributes to tourism, supplementing the tourism offer, as well as to the
improvement of the nutrition of the local residents.
As a second effect, tourism brings about the emergence of a new food preserving industry
(since tourists’ arrival is planned months in advance). In certain cases, due to the very high
price of farmland, tourist zones are located on land of inferior quality and at low price and,
consequently, the expansion of food production is a real chance for the economic
development of poorer local communities (table no. 4).
Table no. 4: The evolution of food production as an attraction
Agriculture / landscape
Fishing

Horticulture, viticulture
Cider orch rds

Food examples
Sea and fresh water fish
Shellfish, branded oysters,
mussels, cockles
Fruit and wines
Ciders, perry

Arable

Fruit, vegetables, cereals

Dairy

Milk, butter, clotted cream and
cheese

Livestock

Cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry

Game, wood, field and river
Experiences represent an
existing but previously
unarticulated genre of
economic output

Furred, feathered and fish

Maricultur

Tourism examples
Holiday activity, sport
Oyster beds
Vineyard tours, tastings
Tastings, tours and festivals
Farmers’ markets, farm shops
and tours
Creams teas, souvenirs
Restaurants, shops, markets
and festivals
Sport

The Experience Economy
Source: Hall and Gősling, 2013, p.15

The Community Based Tourism (CBT) term emerged in mid-90s. In general, CBT is
circulated on a small scale, implying interactions between visitors and the host community,
and it is suitable to and applied mostly in rural and regional areas. CBT is usually understood
as to be managed and held by the community, for the community. It is a form of “local”
tourism, favoring local service providers and focusing on the interpretation and
communication of the local culture and environment. This goal was pursued and supported
(NGOs). The Community Based Tourism (CBT) is, probably, one of the oldest forms of
tourism. A community involves persons that have a kind of collective responsibility and the
capacity to make decisions as representative bodies. CBT is that tourism where the
inhabitants of an area (mostly rural, poor and economically marginalized) invite tourists to
visit their communities supplying accommodation. The inhabitants make incomes as land
managers, entrepreneurs, service providers and product suppliers. At least part of the tourism
receipts is put aside for the projects that bring benefits to the community as a whole.
CBT allows tourists to discover local habitats, wild fauna, and celebrates and observes
traditional cultures and rituals. The community is aware of the commercial and social value
of their natural heritage through tourism, and this will favor the preservation of these
resources. The community may choose to co-operate with a partner in the private sector to
supply capital, customers, marketing, accommodation for tourists or other expertise. Under
an agreement on supporting the development and preservation of the community and on the
planning of tourism development in partnership with the community, this partner may or may
not hold a share of the tourism organization.
In most of the cases, communities may be made up of farmers, fishermen, indigenous people,
craftsmen or quilombolas (descendants of the Afro-Brazilian slaves who escaped from
plantation slavery until its eradication in 1888) who live in faraway beautiful and well
preserved settlements. The tourist heritage and the traditions were so obvious that they
decided to create infrastructures to accommodate tourists and to draw up projects at
community level to improve the standards of living and to preserve the environment by means
of tourism.
These projects provide services such as accommodation, traditional cuisine, eco-tourism and
cultural activities. A logic of equitable trade is applied, tourists paying a fair price for often
unique and top quality products and services in a context of transparency and equality. For
trips, this is a real and rich experience. They come to know local traditions, to involve
themselves in cultural activities and have the possibility to see the virgin nature and their
ecosystems. These local communities do not become tourist entrepreneurs. Farmers still want
to grow vegetables and breed animals, the indigenous people still want to live their culture
and preserve their traditions, while fishermen only want to fish. CBT is a source of
complementary income (only 15% on an average), which is used to improve living standards
and ecosystems. For this reason, they are guided by a set of principles, among which income
redistribution, transparency and capacity consolidation. In other words, they make exactly
the opposite of mass tourism. As a matter of fact, in many cases, CBT is the best and most
efficient modality of protection against mass tourism. It is common knowledge that the
powerful communities have a more political influence and visibility to sensitize themselves
to their rights and to protect their territories.
The use of good practices in CBT contributes to each of the “three pillars of sustainability”
to supply social, economic and environmental benefits. The three pillars of sustainability are
presented in the graph below, showing that sustainability is best achieved when the
environmental, economic and social objectives are attained through the same initiatives. This
can meet social needs, contributes to building a sustainable environment and can be
commercially viable. Community based tourism was popular as a means of sustaining and
preserving biodiversity especially in the developing countries, and of relating livelihood to
the preservation of biodiversity, all while sustainably diminishing rural poverty and attaining
both objectives.. CBT can boost social sustainability by enabling local communities to
manage their own resources and labour employment, and by supporting and preserving the
cultural heritage. Environmental benefits include the generation of income for communities
to actively protect their area from degradation, to enhance preservation-related efforts and to
attract tourists more particularly by means of eco-tourism initiatives.
How does CBT act efficiently?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

it supports local economic development through labour employment diversification
it is financially viable;
it observes and encourages the equitable participation of the local community;
it is ecologically sustainable and minimises the impact on the environment;
it preserves and promotes the cultural heritage;
it educates visitors about culture and nature;
it demonstrates good management practices;
it provides quality and expertise in conditions of safety for all those involved.

Nonetheless, there are risks related to CBT in the developing countries more particularly
when it is introduced as a “quick solution” for the communities lacking means of sustenance.
Elements such as preservation of natural zones, of art, handicrafts, archaeological and
historical areas, of cultural traditions are points of attraction for tourists, tourism contributing
to the provision of financial resources, which justifies the development of tourism.
In general, local residents are proud when they see that tourists are attracted by their heritage,
which often leads to a revival of aspects of the historical, natural and cultural heritage. This
presupposes a greater concern of the inhabitants in relation to the environment.
As pointed out before, tourism also generates problems to the communities and the local
culture. To start with traffic and crowds, with an excessive noise level, which can result from
the uncontrolled development of tourist circulation. The biggest problem is that of
insufficient parking lots, which lead to agglomeration, unpleasant for both tourists and the
inhabitants of the receiving area (Manda, 2002).
Another problem that affects to an ever greater extent the communities is the air pollution
generated by the internal combustion vehicles of the tourists. This has serious implications
on the population and can cause certain diseases. The inappropriate use and treatment of
waste waters and solid wastes is one of the causes of the pollution of surface and deep waters.
Improper waste recycling can lead to the spreading of parasites and diseases.
Local residents may no longer have an easy access to important tourist attractions (museums,
theatres, parks etc.) if they are used by too many tourists.
Tourists’ uncontrolled use of parks and archaeological and historical zones can result in their
deterioration. The wrong attitude towards wildlife can affect the normal behaviour of animals
and their breeding. Graffiti, vandalism and illegal appropriation of items as souvenirs can
destroy archaeological sites and historical monuments. The local cultural heritage is subject
to degradation and the cultural identity can be destroyed when trade is practised intensively
and when local traditions, art and handicrafts are modified. Local youth’s imitation of
tourists’ conduct can lead to the extinction of local cultural values and traditions (Porojan,
2008).
outside the tourist area are employed, since they will never know it as well as the people
living there. The same stands valid when tourist organisations are managed or owned by
outsiders. The import of products used in the tourism industry leads to economic losses even
if this is necessary for the zones with small tourist areas.
The individual human experience lived as tourist is usually shared with other people. Even
when travelling alone, the tourist comes in contact with other people and social institutions.
Tourists can become victims of crime or they can commit unacceptable social acts.
Knowledge of tourists’ social interaction with other tourists, with local residents and social
institutions can contribute to reducing conflicts and facilitating our understanding of the
social conduct and functioning of the structure of various societies and communities.
Problems can be avoided when tourist activities are based on planning, development and
correct and responsible management; otherwise a lot of people will suffer the consequences.

Conclusions
First of all, food and tourism play major part in contemporary economy. Food is the key of
all cultures and the major element of global intangible heritage and an increasingly important
attraction for tourists. The linkages between food and tourism also provide a platform for
local economic and cultural development. Food experience help to brand and market
destinations as well as supporting local traditions and crafts that is so attractive to tourists.
Food provides a basis for tourism experiences by: linking culture and tourism, developing
the meal experience, producing distinctive food, developing the critical infrastructure for
food production and consumption supporting local culture
Economic development is the major goal of local communities, tourism being a modality of
attaining this goal. In this context, the Romanian laws provide territorial public
administrations with the legal resources allowing them to get involved in the sustainable local
development of tourism. Moreover, by designing appropriate strategies for the development
of the tourist phenomenon, the local communities can get involved in the local economic
development in an organised and efficient manner.

