
Argentina tends to grow relatively faster when its economy is integrated into world
markets. Why, then, did it remain closed to world trade for 60 years during the twentieth
century? In this paper we contend, like many other authors have in the past (see, among
´
others, Dıaz-Alejandro 1970, 1984; Mallon and Sourrouille 1975; O’Donnell 1977;
Waisman 1987; Rogowski 1989; Gerchunoff 1989; Taylor 1994; Gerchunoff and Llach
2004), that a severe distributional conﬂict lies at the core of this phenomenon. In
Argentina, for a large part of the twentieth century, what was efﬁcient was not popular. In
the words of one insightful economic historian of the Argentine Republic:
‘‘… Argentina is too transparently a Stolper–Samuelson country where a zerosum view of economic policy is plausible in the short and even the medium term’’
´
(Dıaz-Alejandro 1984).
The ideas behind the Stolper–Samuelson theorem explain the increasingly
pronounced urban–rural political cleavage seen in the aftermath of the Second
World War; however, they do not explain the process of integration into world
markets. We show that these processes can be understood once we add a nontradable sector and frictions in the mobility of capital across sectors. Under these
conditions, free trade can beneﬁt all factors of production. However, even if that is
the case, protectionism may persist if political institutions are not able to enforce
long-term agreements between political actors.
Up to the 1930s, Argentina was well integrated into the world economy and,
although some protectionism naturally arose in the wake of the worldwide crisis of
the 1930s, it was only after the Second World War that the country closed its
economy off from world markets and then remained in a situation close to autarky
until the mid-1970s. It was only after a long period of absolute economic decline
and devastating hyperinﬂation that an intensive program of reform and integration
into the world economy was adopted.
In this paper, we present a simple three-sector model to narrate the economic
history of Argentina during the twentieth century as seen through the prism of its
integration into and dis-integration from the world economy. In our model, the
primary sector uses land and capital to produce agricultural goods; the secondary
sector employs labor and capital to produce manufactured or industrial goods; and
the tertiary sector uses only labor to produce services. We assume that (as in fact is
the case) Argentina has a comparative advantage in the production of agricultural
goods. Thus, the economy exports agricultural goods and imports manufactured
goods; services are non-tradable and are always produced in equilibrium. The
government’s intervention in the economy is limited to taxing trade and distributing
the proceeds among the relevant agents.
We characterize the steady-state equilibria of this economy and show that the
economy could operate under specialization and trade, where neither labor nor
capital is employed to produce manufactured goods; under diversiﬁcation and trade,
where the manufacturing sector is active in production; or under autarky, where
there is no trade (for the sake of completeness, we also show that there are other
socioeconomic groups: workers, landowners and capitalists. We use our model to
characterize these different groups’ demands for protectionist policies. Assuming
that capital moves between the primary and secondary sectors more slowly than
labor moves between the secondary and tertiary sectors, we show that importsubstitution policies exhibit path dependence. Indeed, this is a very important
insight into understanding the economic history of Argentina.
Using the insights derived from our model, we then argue that much of the
distributional conﬂict that arose during that period was among owners of different
production factors and that trade policies were widely used to shift income across
groups. At the beginning of the century, the country specialized in the production of
primary goods and was highly integrated into world trade. During the inter-war
period, trade opportunities and the terms of trade worsened and this led to an
incipient industrialization process. Argentina started the second half of the century
with a very different economic conﬁguration. Industrialization had come a long
way, and integration into world markets was weak. These new economic conditions
also changed the political equilibrium; urban workers employed in the manufacturing sector and industrialists were now major social actors and they were
demanding protectionist policies. Traditional sectors comprising owners of factors
employed in the primary sector, on the other hand, supported free trade policies.
This distributional conﬂict surrounding trade policy shaped the politics of the
second half of the century.
The years that followed the Second World War were a time of an extraordinarily
rapid expansion of trade, in which Argentina was not an active participant. Instead,
it embarked on an ambitious process of import-substitution industrialization that
resulted in bumpy cycles of economic expansion followed by sharp recessions.
Argentina had the opportunity to return to an export-led growth strategy, but the
new political forces that emerged from the industrialization process during the interwar period were able to block any attempt to liberalize.
Liberalization could have been achieved gradually, thus mitigating the losses of
those with vested interests in protected activities. However, it would have required a
set of political institutions capable of enforcing intertemporal agreements between
political groups. Sadly, Argentina lacked such institutions (see Spiller and Tommasi
2009). Instead, the dismantlement of the import-substitution strategy came only
after a substantial deterioration of economic and political conditions. The steps that
were then taken toward liberalization were abrupt and applied as shock policies by
political groups that had political power but that did not represent a consensus of the
Argentine population. As a result, Argentina’s integration into world markets
proved to be extremely costly in terms of inequality and poverty.
Our main thesis is that the interplay of economic and political forces that were
spurred by international conditions during the inter-war period trapped the country
into an anti-trade equilibrium which limited economic growth. The conditions that
generated the anti-trade trap in Argentina, however, should have also generated the
same effect in other new-settler, land-rich economies. This poses a pressing
question: Was Argentina the only economy that fell into an anti-trade trap? We
and outcomes.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we relate our work
with the existing literature and explain why we focus on trade policy. In Sect. 3, we
set up and solve the model. In Sect. 4, we interpret the economic history of
Argentina during the twentieth century as seen through the prism of our model. In
Sect. 5, we compare Argentina with another new-settler, land-rich economy:
Australia. Finally, in Sect. 6, we present our conclusions.

2 Why is trade policy important?
There is a vast amount of literature on the decline of Argentina during the twentieth
century, and a wide variety of factors have been identiﬁed as causes of its dismal
economic performance. However, there is broad agreement in the literature that this
period was marked by a severe distributional conﬂict that shaped the politics and the
´
economics of the country (see, among others, Dıaz-Alejandro 1970, 1984; Mallon
and Sourrouille 1975; O’Donnell 1977; Waisman 1987; Rogowski 1989; Gerchunoff 1989; Taylor 1994; Gerchunoff and Llach 2004).
Essays on Argentine economic history usually describe, in more or less detail, the
periods of economic crisis that alternated with stability and recovery; this is usually
´
referred to as a ‘‘stop-and-go’’ process (see Dıaz-Alejandro 1970; Mallon and
Sourrouille 1975; Gerchunoff and Llach 2004). These authors note that the crises
were usually caused by overvaluation of the domestic currency, high inﬂation and
current account deﬁcits, whereas stabilization generally involved some combination
of ﬁscal austerity, devaluation and price controls. Once the economy had been
stabilized, the government resumed its proﬂigate behavior which led inevitably to
yet another ‘‘stop’’. These stop-and-go cycles were closely linked to the real
exchange rate or to the relative price of tradables versus non-tradables; stabilization
required a real devaluation, whereas government deﬁcits generated real
appreciation.
We will focus on a different relative price: the terms of trade, i.e., the price of
exports relative to the price of imports. We will also discuss the effect of
protectionism on such relative prices as perceived by economic actors. To isolate
the analysis from the effect of the real exchange rate, we build a model in which
there is no debt and the trade balance has to be balanced in every single period.
The real exchange rate is a key element in analyzing short-term debt management
problems, short-term capital ﬂows and agents’ perceived wealth (Heymann 1984).
However, long-run trends in terms of trade and persistent trade policies are key to an
understanding of long-term investment and capital reallocation in the economy.
Ultimately, these factors are more inﬂuential in shaping the political and economic
landscape. That is why our narrative deals with general developments over a span of
decades rather than delving into the details of each one of the sudden stops that
plagued Argentina during this period.
For at least 50 years, successive Argentine governments intentionally distorted
distortions altered the allocation of resources in the economy, which in turn affected
the political equilibrium.
Finally, we do not minimize the role of organizations and institutions in shaping
´
the course of history (North 1990; Cortes-Conde 1998). As we argue in this paper,
once the import-substitution development strategy had proven to be inefﬁcient,
liberalization measures could have been instituted gradually to mitigate the losses of
those with vested interests in protected activities. A gradual but steady process of
liberalization would have required consensus among different interested groups and
a mature institutional framework capable of limiting the incumbent government’s
ability to discretionally introduce major shifts in trade policy and beneﬁt some
groups at the expenses of others. Argentina lacked such institutions and as a result
trade liberalization occurred abruptly, without consensus and too late.

3 A simple model
In this section, we introduce a simple model that we use to articulate the analytical
discussion in the next section. We use a model with two tradable goods and one
non-tradable good. The tradable goods are labeled as agricultural (a) and
manufactured (m). The agricultural good is produced in the primary sector, using
land and capital, while the manufactured good is produced in the secondary sector,
using labor and capital. The non-tradable good (n) is labeled as a service and is
produced using labor only. The economy is endowed with K units of capital, T units
of land and L units of labor.
The tradable goods are produced using the following Cobb–Douglas production
functions:1
a
Ya ¼ AT 1Àa Ka ;
b
Ym ¼ ML1Àb Km :
m

The non-tradable good is produced with the following linear technology:
Yn ¼ Ln ;
where Yi is the total output of good i and Ki (Li) is the amount of capital (labor)
employed in sector i 2 {a, m, n}. A(M) is the total factor productivity in the primary (secondary) sector. We assume that capital is used more intensively in the
secondary sector: 0 B a B b B 1. We also assume that there are many competitive
ﬁrms in each sector, which allows us to cast the model in terms of a representative
ﬁrm of the sector that behaves competitively.
1

The parameters A and M in the production functions of the tradable goods can be interpreted as neutral
technological shocks. However, if the production function were instead to include an additional imported
input with a low elasticity of substitution, then an increase in the price of that input could be interpreted as
types of agents: workers, endowed with one unit of labor; landowners, endowed
with equal shares of the total rewards to land; and capitalists, endowed with equal
shares of total capital. Agents consume the three goods (a, m, n), for which they
have identical preferences as represented by a Cobb–Douglas utility function:2
Uj ¼ /a lncaj þ /m lncmj þ ð1 À /a À /m Þlncnj ;
where cij is the consumption by agent j of good i. We will use Ci to denote aggregate
consumption for good i.
We assume that the Argentine economy is a price-taker in world markets.
Therefore, the international prices for the agricultural good pa and the manufactured
good pm are considered exogenous. The terms of trade are denoted by p = pa/pm,
i.e., the relative price of exports over imports. We also assume the absence of any
international capital markets; therefore, trade should be balanced in equilibrium.
The government intervenes in the economy by taxing trade. Without loss of
generality, we assume that the government introduces an ad valorem tax on exports
at rate s. We conﬁne our attention to taxes on exports of the primary good. Since the
equilibrium depends on relative prices, the effect of any tax on imports can be
replicated by a tax on exports (Lerner symmetry result). Because we are interested
in Argentina, which is a country with comparative advantages in the primary sector,
we will not fully develop the case in which the pattern of trade reverses. If the
economy reverses its pattern of trade, we assume that export taxes (on the
manufactured good) are zero. The economic agents take the export tax, s, as given.
Unless the country is in autarky, domestic prices are given by pd ¼ pa ð1 À sÞ and
a
pd ¼ pm , where the nominal exchange rate is normalized to 1. We assume that the
m
government reinjects the tax proceeds into the economy via lump-sum transfers to
agents.

3.1 The long-run equilibrium
In the long-run equilibrium, ﬁrms hire capital and labor competitively and produce
according to their production functions, while consumers sell their endowments to
the ﬁrms and buy the produced goods with the proceeds. In the appendix, we solve
for the long-run equilibrium of this economy (see Sect. 7.1). Here, we will highlight
our results.
It will be useful, for our purposes, to consider the preferences parameters (/i), the
technological parameters (a and b) and the endowments of the economy as being
ﬁxed. We will focus on the effects of changes in the terms of trade (p) and export
duties (s). As shown in the appendix, there are four types of long-run equilibria:
•

Specialization: the country produces only in the primary and tertiary sectors; it
imports the manufactured good and exports the agricultural good.

2

Homogeneity of degree one allows us to ignore distributional issues in computing the steady state of the
economy and studying its equilibrium properties. Unitary elasticity of substitution also simpliﬁes the

Page 7 of 53 5

Diversiﬁcation and trade: the country produces in the three sectors; it imports
the manufactured good and exports the agricultural good.
Autarky: the country produces in the three sectors; there is no trade.
Diversiﬁcation and reversal of the pattern of trade: the country produces in the
three sectors; it imports the agricultural good and exports the manufactured
good.

Each pair (p, s) is associated with one and only one of these equilibria; therefore,
under the assumptions made, we can represent the areas or regions that correspond
to each of these types of long-run equilibria in the (p, s) plane:
Notice that, for a given tax rate s, as the terms of trade worsen (p decreases), the
economy moves from specialization to diversiﬁcation and trade, to autarky and,
ﬁnally, to a reversal of the patterns of trade. For higher levels of taxes s, the autarky
region is larger.
Consider the share of capital employed in the secondary sector: j = Km/
(Km ? Ka). This is a measure of industrialization that will be useful in our
discussion about preferences for protectionism. Figure 2 shows how this share
varies in the long-run equilibrium for different conﬁgurations of terms of trade and
taxes. A ﬁgure for k = Lm/(Lm ? La) would look similar.
Notice that the specialization region in Fig. 1 coincides with the region where j
equals zero in Fig. 2. Under specialization and trade, capital and labor employment
in the secondary sector are zero.
In the autarky region, the tax rate is set high enough so that the country will not
trade with the rest of the world; consequently, changes in p or s will have no
marginal effect on the resulting allocation of resources in the economy. For any
point in the region, the factor allocation is the autarky allocation, which we denote
as jaut and kaut (see Sect. 7.1.1 in the appendix). The autarky region in Fig. 1
coincides with the region with j = jaut in Fig. 2.
In the diversiﬁcation and trade region, the manufacturing sector employs capital
and labor. As we move upward and to the left within this region, both j and k
increase from zero, as in the frontier with the specialization and trade region, up to
jaut and kaut in the autarky region. The diversiﬁcation and trade region in Fig. 1
coincides with the region where j is increasing in Fig. 2.
Finally, in the reversal of patterns of trade region, the tax rate on agricultural
exports has no effect on the real economy. As p decreases, the secondary sector
grows and employs more resources. The reversal region in Fig. 1 coincides with the
leftmost region in Fig. 2. As the terms of trade worsen, the share of capital in the
secondary sector approaches one; however, the share of labor, k, converges toward
an upper bound that is less than one, since some workers are always employed in the
tertiary sector.
It seems appropriate to make two remarks about our model and its usefulness in
analyzing the Argentine economy. First, we have simpliﬁed the analysis to two
tradable sectors. Therefore, our model does not allow for an equilibrium in which
some manufactures are exported while others are imported. This is due to the
assumption that manufactures are a homogeneous good. A careful interpretation of

history. The manufacturing sector should be interpreted as comprising the activities
that compete with imports, the primary sector as the set of activities oriented toward
the international market and the tertiary sector as the services and manufactures that
are naturally protected from external competition. Thus, our model assumes that
exportable activities are intensive in capital and land, import-competing manufactures in labor and capital, and non-tradables in labor.
Second, we should interpret the autarky equilibrium as representing a situation
in which the economy has exhausted its possibilities of import substitution, rather
than as an actual autarkic situation. During the period under consideration,
Argentina was never in actual autarky; however, it took its import-substitution
strategy almost all the way to its technological limit. Of course, there were some
inputs that had to be imported because it was simply not feasible to produce them
domestically.3

3

We can reinterpret our model to accommodate an imported input. For a linearly homogeneous Cobb–
Douglas production function on K; L and the imported input F, we can write the value-added function
VA ¼ Y À pf F. If F is chosen optimally for a given pf , K, and L, then the value-added function is also a
linearly homogenous Cobb–Douglas on K and L. Our production functions should be reinterpreted as
value-added functions. An increase in the international price of the imported input can be reinterpreted as

3.2 Political economy
Our assumption that each agent owns a single type of input allows us to group
agents according to the input they own and the industry where they are employed.
As we show below, the tax rate s affects the real remuneration of each of these
groups in a different way. Some groups will gain from an increase in protectionism
(higher s), while others will lose. Thus, there is a distributional conﬂict around
protectionism.
Notice that no conﬂict would arise in an economy where each agent owns the
same bundle of inputs. Yet, agents endowed with different resources have
conﬂicting interests. The essence of the rivalry between proponents of free trade
and advocates of protectionism lies in the assumption that each agent can be
identiﬁed with one of the socioeconomic groups based on the inputs that the agent
owns and the industry in which the agent is employed.
The reader will recall that we have assumed that tax revenues are distributed in
lump-sum transfers to agents; thus, the agents’ attitudes will also depend on the
share of total tax revenues that each one of them expects to receive. Since we do not
specify who the recipients of the lump-sum transfers are, we should bear in mind
that, even if a group’s real remuneration is reduced by an increase in export taxes,
theorem, it is impossible to put each and every agent in a better off position by
increasing the tax rate and redistributing the revenues.
In analyzing the effect of changes of s on each group’s welfare, we consider the
short-, medium- and long-run time horizons. In the short run, no reallocation of
factors takes place. In the medium run, only labor is allowed to move between the
secondary and tertiary sectors. In the long run, all factors can be reallocated, and the
economy fully adjusts to its new long-run equilibrium.
In Appendix 1 (Sect. 7.2.1), we show that the diversiﬁcation and trade region is
particularly prone to distributional conﬂict. This is because, in the other regions,
either all interests are aligned (under specialization) or a marginal change in the
export tax rate has no real consequences (under reversal of the pattern of trade and
autarky). Therefore, we will focus on pairs (p, s) such that the economy will be in
the diversiﬁcation and trade region.
In the short run, protectionist policies will beneﬁt owners of factors employed in
the secondary sector and will harm those employed in the primary and tertiary
sectors. Since the proportion of factors employed in the secondary sector increases
as we move upward and toward the left in the diversiﬁcation and trade region,
protectionist policies have more short-run support as we move closer to the autarky
region and less support as we move closer to the specialization area (see Proposition
3 in Appendix 1).
In the medium run, landlords and capitalists with investments in the primary
sector will oppose protectionism, while capitalists with investments in the secondary
sector will support it. Workers will now have a homogenous attitude toward s;
either all workers will prefer protectionism or all of them will oppose it. We show
that the pairs of (p, s) at which workers switch from opposing protectionist policies
to supporting them lies in the diversiﬁcation and trade region (see Proposition 5 in
Appendix 1) (Fig. 3).
In the long run, landlords will always oppose protectionist policies and will
beneﬁt from improvements in terms of trade (Proposition 6, Appendix 1). One of
our key results is that workers will also prefer a zero tax rate if p is sufﬁciently high
(Proposition 7, Appendix 1). In this case, workers prefer to be employed in the
tertiary sector where they can take advantage of the high level of national income
induced by high terms of trade. The result for capitalists is similar; for a sufﬁciently
high p, farsighted capitalists will also support free trade policies.
The key insight that we want to convey here is that agents will support or oppose
policies according to their source of income and their relevant time horizon. In the
diversiﬁcation and trade region, agents’ attitudes toward protectionism exhibit an
interesting pattern. Landlords oppose them in all cases; capitalists employed in the
manufacturing sector support them both in the short and medium terms.4 Who
4

We will assume that capitalists are not farsighted. We are careful to draw the distinction between
different time horizons in view of the fact that capital is not perfectly mobile across sectors. If we were to
assume that capital is, in fact, not mobile at all and that capital reallocation occurs only through a process
in which depreciated capital in one sector is not replaced while the other sector has a positive net rate of
investment, then it would make perfect sense to assume that capitalists whose capital is already locked

prevails in this struggle depends on several factors that are beyond the scope of this
paper; however, our analytical model gives us some mileage in answering this
question. It seems fairly reasonable that the size of the capitalist faction that
supports protectionism will be positively correlated with the likelihood of these
policies being enacted. Moreover, in a democracy, workers could be the pivotal
faction that shifts the balance of power.
Clearly, as we move upward and to the left in the diversiﬁcation and trade region,
protectionist policies will enjoy wider support. As we move in this direction, both
workers and capitalists will be more likely to advocate these policies. In the short
run, there will be more workers and capitalists employed in the manufacturing
sector. In the medium run, workers as a whole group are also more likely to prefer
taxation.5
This model can also generate endogenous pressure for the enactment of free trade
policies in a protected economy that experiences favorable terms of trade or high
levels of productivity in the primary sector. As p grows, farsighted workers will
stand to beneﬁt greatly from free trade policies. Landlords’ remuneration under free
trade is greater when p is large, and they will therefore support these policies more
actively. Consequently, if the economy is trapped in the autarky equilibrium, higher
p will intensify the distributional conﬂict because those who want to challenge the
status quo have more incentives to do so.

5

There is a signiﬁcant difference between the outcomes in the short and medium terms. In the medium
run, workers are a homogeneous group and, when they change their preferences toward protectionism,
they do so as a group. In the short run, only those employed in the secondary sector will support
We will now discuss how, starting from a situation of specialization, a signiﬁcant
and exogenous worsening of the terms of trade may lead to an incipient
industrialization process, change the ‘‘political equilibrium’’ and lead to the
introduction of an import-substitution policy. Interestingly enough for our case
study, even if the terms of trade were to later rebound to the previous level at which
the economy operated under specialization, new endogenous political forces may
have developed that prevent the economy from returning to its initial stance. As in
the cases of path dependence discussed in the literature on inefﬁcient institutions
(see, among others, North 1990), there are self-reinforcing mechanisms for the
persistence of import-substitution policies.
Suppose that the economy is specialized in the primary sector. In that case, the
preferences of all agents in the economy are aligned; they all agree on a zero export
tax rate. Naturally, this does not mean that they agree on the level of redistribution
by other means such as an income tax, but we are abstracting from the analysis of
these issues here. Suppose that the terms of trade worsen signiﬁcantly and that the
country naturally initiates an incipient industrialization process, i.e., the economy
moves into diversiﬁcation and trade. Initially, protectionist policies will lack
support, since most of the capital is still employed in the primary sector and most
workers produce services. If workers take into account the medium-run prospects,
they may favor an increase in s; however, for most of them, it is likely that the shortrun costs of a tax increase would outweigh the medium-run beneﬁts.
As the process of industrialization deepens, either because of a further
deterioration in the terms of trade or because of capital ﬂows from the primary to
the secondary sector, the short- and medium-run support for protectionist policies
increases and eventually these policies may be implemented. Protectionism tends to
be self-reinforcing, since now more capital and labor will ﬂow to the secondary
sector. New waves of demand for protectionism drive the economy toward autarky,
which might be characterized as an import-substitution strategy. Notice, however,
that for this to happen, either the economy has to have a high level of capital—i.e.,
to be rich enough—to transfer capital from the primary sector to the manufacturing
sector, and the shock has to be sufﬁciently long-lasting to allow the economy to
accumulate enough capital in the manufacturing sector to give rise to a protectionist
coalition.
Suppose now that, once the economy is industrialized and the import-substitution
strategy has driven the economy close to autarky, the terms of trade improve. In the
short run, this harms all the agents who have switched to the secondary sector.
However, if these agents hold political power, they will not allow capital to ﬂow
back to the primary sector; instead, they will increase the export tax. If the tax is
increased to levels that ensure autarky, the improvement in the terms of trade will
not have any real effect. The economy will be trapped in a situation where every
improvement in the terms of trade will be neutralized and nobody will gain (or lose)
from it.
If the terms of trade improve, the distributional conﬂict becomes more intense.
the beneﬁt of reducing the level of protectionism increases with the terms of trade.
They will be opposed by industrial capitalists and shortsighted workers who beneﬁt
from protectionism. This distributional conﬂict may grow in intensity, destabilizing
the political equilibrium and, depending on how the conﬂict is resolved, spurring
liberalization. Similarly, the distributional conﬂict will also become more severe if
the productivity in the primary sector increases.
The next subsection deals with other forces that may give rise to trade
liberalization, not through increased distributional conﬂict, but by weakening the
protectionist political coalition of workers–capitalists.
3.4 Forces leading to trade liberalization
Events that reduce the proportion of workers and capital in the manufacturing sector
will weaken the coalition that supports protectionist policies. We have discussed
how an increase in the price or productivity of the agricultural sector may generate
enough distributional conﬂict to prompt the formation of a coalition of landlords and
longsighted workers that supports liberalization. In this subsection, we show what
other kinds of events can shift employment and capital allocation when the
economy has traveled far enough down the road of protectionism.
In our basic model, protectionism will lead the economy somewhere near
autarky. The assumptions of Cobb–Douglas preferences and technology imply that
the shares of labor and capital (k and j) in autarky depend only on the Cobb–
Douglas shares (a, b, /m and /a) and not on factor endowments or productivity (see
Sect. 7.1.1 in Appendix 1). This will not be the case if we relax the Cobb–Douglas
assumption. We can ﬁrst relax the assumption of unitary elasticity of substitution in
preferences and technology. We can go even further and relax the homotheticity
assumption. We note that, if preferences are elastic but technologies are not, the
share of workers employed in the secondary sector decreases with both population
growth and productivity in the primary sector.
Finally, we conjecture that labor unions that were created or empowered to
maintain and support protectionist policies also generated frictions in the labor
market that ended up depriving them of their most vital input: unionized workers.
3.4.1 Relaxing the Cobb–Douglas assumption
In this section, we analyze how shocks to factor endowments and productivity can
change the factor allocation of an economy in autarky. As shown in Sect. 7.1.1 in
the Appendix, if preferences and technology are Cobb–Douglas, then the shares of
labor and capital (k and j) in autarky will depend only on the parameters (a, b, /m
and /a), rather than on factor endowments or productivity. However, under more
general preferences or technologies, capital and labor shares will depend on
productivity and endowments.
In Sect. 7.3 in the appendix, we show how changes in endowments or
productivity can shift the allocation of labor and capital if we relax the assumption
would result in a smaller share of workers employed in the manufacturing sector
(lower k); however, we will focus on just two shocks: population growth and
technological improvements in the agricultural sector.
Population growth will decrease k if the EoS in consumption is greater than the
EoS in the production of manufactures. The intuition is that an increase in the
number of workers will push wages down. As a result, both manufactures and
services will become cheaper. However, the percentage fall in price will be sharper
in services (i.e., services will become cheaper relative to manufactures) because
services employ only labor. The increase in the demand for services will be directly
related to consumers’ elasticity of substitution. Because labor becomes cheaper, the
manufacturing sector will become more labor intensive. The increase in demand for
labor in the secondary sector will be related to the elasticity of factor substitution. If
consumers’ preferences exhibit more elasticity of substitution than manufacturing
ﬁrms’ technology, the share of workers employed in the service sector will increase.
A similar argument shows that the shift in the share of capital, j, will have an
opposite sign from the shift in k. Therefore, under these circumstances, we may
expect to see that, as population grows, k decreases and j increases.
Higher productivity in the agricultural sector will reduce k if the EoS in
preferences is greater than 1 and greater than the EoS in the technology of
manufactures.6 Moreover, the share of capital, j, will decrease if the EoS in
preferences is greater than 1. The intuition is that an increase in productivity in the
agricultural sector will depress the autarky price of the primary good and increase
the return of capital. High substitution elasticity in consumption implies that
consumers will increase the share of primary goods in their bundles and that capital
will move from the secondary to the primary sector. Low elasticity of substitution in
the manufacturing sector implies that the marginal productivity of labor in that
sector will decrease rapidly as a consequence of decapitalization; therefore, labor
will shift to the tertiary sector.
Alternatively, if preferences and technology are not homothetic, then it is
possible to obtain decreasing k and j following exogenous shocks if they change the
total income of the economy or total production of a particular good. For example, if
the manufacturing sector becomes more capital intensive, then the autarky
equilibrium will result in a smaller k and a larger j. Similarly, if preferences
shift toward services as income grows, then neutral technological improvements or
increases in all endowments will reduce k as more workers become employed in the
service sector. Moreover, if the share of total income represented by food
expenditures tends to decrease and food is produced in the primary sector, then the
primary sector will tend to shrink under autarky (i.e., j increases). More
importantly, since the primary good has less weight in the consumption bundle,
the impact of trade liberalization on workers and industrial capitalists is less
harmful.

6

It will also reduce k if the EoS in consumption is less than 1 and less than the EoS in the production of
We have discussed how protectionist policies shift labor and capital employment to
the secondary sector, which reinforces the political demand for protectionist
policies. So far, we have abstracted from the institutions and organizations that
might emerge to represent these demands. As we will argue later, labor unions were
organized and empowered during the Peronist period and were key actors during the
following 40 years. Labor unions’ most visible role was not lobbying for
protectionism, but intervening in the wage-setting and employment decisions of
manufacturing ﬁrms to keep real wages high and avoid layoffs. In this section, we
will explain why, if the number of workers in the economy is increasing, unions’
zeal to prevent wage declines will lead to an increase in the share of workers
employed in the service sector and to their ultimate loss of political power.
Labor unions can inﬂuence wages in two basic ways. First, by restricting the
access of workers to the manufacturing sector (e.g., enforcing closed-shop
agreements), they can prevent wage equalization between the secondary and
tertiary sectors and maintain a positive industrial wage premium in the medium and
long run. Second, through aggressive collective bargaining, they can obtain a higher
share of total remuneration and reduce the return to capital in the sector in the
medium run. In an environment where the relative supply of workers is increasing,
unions will have to rely on some of these interventions if they are to keep real wages
from falling.
If labor unions effectively restrict access to the manufacturing sector, the service
sector will absorb a disproportionately high number of new workers in the medium
run and long run. This will result in a growing share of workers employed in the
service sector being opposed to the labor unions; they will be against both restricted
access and protectionist policies.
On the other hand, if labor unions can use their market power to set wages above
the value of the marginal product of labor, then the remuneration of capital in
unionized activities will decrease. In the long run, capital will ﬂow to alternative
uses, such as agriculture or non-unionized manufacturing activities. Decapitalized,
unionized manufacturing activities will not hire new employers and, as a result,
union membership will decline in relative terms.
In both of the cases reviewed above, unions’ objectives of keeping wages high
and avoiding layoffs of union members run counter to their long-run survival in a
context where population growth outpaces capital accumulation.
3.5 Lessons from the model
The key result of our model is the ﬁnding that protectionist policies are pathdependent. A land-rich economy that is well integrated into world markets may
embark upon an industrialization process in response to poor terms of trade,
especially if the new prices are not a transient shock. This incipient industrialization
process is possible if the economy has enough capital—i.e., if it is rich enough—and
labor; otherwise, the secondary sector will not be proﬁtable and the economy will
recently employed in the industrial sector have incentives to lodge demands for
protectionism. As the process advances, the political power of these groups grows
and, eventually, their demands may be met. As a consequence, the industrial sector
receives a new boost at the expense of the primary and tertiary sectors, and the
economy gradually becomes closed to world markets. Moreover, the political
coalition supporting protectionism gains power. As a result, anti-trade policies
become entrenched and the economy moves closer to autarky. Even if the
conditions that gave rise to the endogenous industrialization subside, the economy
remains closed, since the alliance of capitalist and workers retains its power.
However, the anti-trade alliance is not unbreakable. Secular trends in labor
supply, frictions between workers and capitalists or a strong improvement in terms
of trade can push the economy back into a free trade equilibrium:
Under more general preferences and technology, population growth and higher
productivity in the primary sector can shift the factor allocation and lead to
increased demands for free trade. In both cases, under some conditions, a greater
share of workers will be employed in the service sector. Therefore, more workers
will support liberalization.
Similarly, if services gain in importance in the consumption bundle, more
workers will be employed in the tertiary sector. As a result, there will be greater
support for liberalization. Moreover, even the owners of inputs employed in the
secondary sector will have weaker incentives to support protectionism if this shift
toward services occurs at the expense of the consumption of the exportable good.
Once the economy is near autarky, capitalists and workers will not be able to use
their coalition’s political power to pursue further industrialization. Besides, they
will be extremely vulnerable to negative shocks in industrial productivity (e.g., an
increase in the price of a non-modeled importable input). Under these circumstances, unions may be tempted to use their power against capitalists, thereby
weakening their alliance. We have discussed how unions, in their zeal to keep wages
from falling in the short run, may introduce distortions that reduce their power in the
long run.
Finally, an improvement in terms of trade or an increase in agricultural
productivity increases the incentives for landlords to intervene in the political
process. The economy will be able to escape the anti-trade trap if landlords are
successful in challenging the coalition of industrial workers and capitalists.

4 Analytical narrative
Argentina did relatively well when it was integrated with world markets. Why, then,
did it remain under autarky for approximately 60 years? We will now use the model
outlined in the previous section to articulate an analytical narrative concerning the
4.1 The Belle Epoque
In 1860, Argentina was a fairly empty land. As in the rest of Latin America, the pace
and characteristics of Argentine expansion were fundamentally determined by the
success with which some of its regions became exporters of primary products (see
´
Cortes-Conde 1979). The period from 1870 to 1914 was one of free trade and
market integration and during this period the country beneﬁted from its marked
comparative advantage in the primary sector due to its vast amount of highly fertile
land (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999). The dramatic decline in transport costs
during the late nineteenth century led to a trade boom and commodity price
convergence internationally. In Argentina, the scarcity of labor and abundance of
land, relative to Europe, induced a high marginal product of labor. The wage
differential between Argentina and some European countries attracted a colossal
ﬂow of overseas immigrants, who came to constitute the majority of Argentina’s
labor force. A similar process also triggered a massive ﬂow of capital into the
´
country (see Cortes-Conde 1979).
During the second half of the ninetieth century, a large proportion of Argentine
land was settled and divided up into latifundia (Adelman 1994). The sharp increase
in the availability of land spurred an expansion in livestock raising, primarily
because it was a non-labor-intensive activity that could be launched at a time when
labor was a scarce resource.
With the pattern of land ownership determined by political history, and with
prices of exports, imports and capital set by international markets, total rents
depended on the labor supply. Therefore, immigration policy became the critical
´
policy variable under the control of the government (Dıaz-Alejandro 1984). Not
surprisingly, the Argentine elite chose to promote immigration. The expansion of
agricultural activities and a pro-immigration policy paved the way for a very
substantial increase in the urban population, especially in Buenos Aires. In addition
to its administrative functions as the capital of the country, this city developed an
increasingly large and sophisticated service sector.
The export-oriented growth made possible by an expanding international market
raised per capita income in a sustained and substantial way. Indeed, the growth
process was closely related to successive booms in the exports of land-intensive
commodities, with land having a very low opportunity cost. The economic
usefulness of the pampas was not discovered overnight, as an oil deposit might be,
but instead arose as the result of the combination of a growing European need for
primary goods, technological progress in transport and an increasing interest on the
part of Argentine policymakers in promoting exports, foreign investment and
immigration. By the beginning of the twentieth century, however, the Argentine
growth process had become less dependent on the discovery of new resource-based
export commodities and on the performance of any one export. It still relied heavily,
however, on a steady expansion of exports based on the growth of the world
economy and on the completion of the adjustment by which primary production was
´
supplied the domestic market with products that were naturally protected from
external competition, (e.g., wine, meat and ﬂour). There also was a smaller
industrial sector that competed with imports (e.g., clothes, cigarettes, perfumes).
These industries were granted some degree of protection after the passage of the
Customs Act of 1876. However, the level and extent of protectionism were rather
´
limited compared to what was yet to come (Gomez-Galvarriato and Williamson
2009). First, the main goal of these customs duties was to obtain revenues for the
government, which was a widely accepted practice in Latin America at the time (see
Brambilla et al. in this volume). Second, the protected activities accounted for a
small share of total economic activity and, to a large extent, the policy was geared
toward protecting regional products as a means of preserving the federalist model
adopted by the country. Thus, this speciﬁc departure from free trade can be more
accurately interpreted as a means of securing revenues and of sustaining a political
order that, on the whole, was pro-export oriented.
Thus, in our view, the period from 1870 to 1914 was one of specialization in
production, with the country specializing in the production of primary goods,
importing manufactured goods and employing its workers mainly in the primary
sector and the services industry. This was therefore a period in which the political
views of the majority of economic agents were aligned against protectionist
policies.
4.2 Globalization backlash
It is not clear whether Argentina could have sustained its fast pace of growth under
specialization (see Llach in this volume) if the world had remained widely
´
integrated, as it was during the Belle Epoque. However, there is no reason why it
should not have diversiﬁed its production and exports of agricultural and
manufactured goods under a policy of free trade. Had the terms of trade remained
favorable for Argentina, even if the productivity of the primary sector had not kept
increasing rapidly, some manufacturing sectors would have eventually become
competitive and taken off. What is more, if the economy had continued to expand, it
would have begun to meet an increasing (but previously inexistent) domestic
demand for many manufactured goods, thereby encouraging their domestic
production, particularly in view of the existence of natural barriers. The same
reasoning applies to services (see Galiani et al. 2008).
Instead, the country’s fortune took a sharp turn for the worse in the 1930s. World
trade collapsed after the Great Depression. The 1932 Ottawa Conference marked the
end of multilateralism in international trade. Great Britain, Argentina’s foremost
trading partner, shifted its trade to members of the Commonwealth. A protectionist
pandemic spread throughout the world. As a consequence, the ratio of world trade
(export plus imports) to GDP declined from 22% in 1913 to 9% in the 1930s.
Though there was a recovery toward the end of the decade, international trade was
again disrupted during the Second World War, when it was geared toward war
requirements. Trade opportunities did not start to improve until after the Second
by 1950, it had surpassed pre-war levels, mostly thanks to the growth of transAtlantic and intra-European trade.7 There is a consensus that, after the Second
World War, a second globalization era began (see, among others, Baldwin and
Martin 1999; Williamson 2002). Nevertheless, the move toward multilateralism was
gradual and was not achieved, for all practical purposes, until the 1990s (see
Brambilla et al. in this volume for a fuller discussion of these issues).
The breakdown of the economic order was transmitted to Latin America ﬁrst of
all through a sharp change in relative prices: dollar export prices collapsed more
steeply than dollar import prices. According to Clemens and Williamson (2002), the
magnitude of the decline was around 30% for Asia and the Middle East and 40% for
Latin America. This decline in the terms of trade was used as a strong argument in
support of the move of the developing world toward autarky in the 1940s and 1950s,
within the context of a highly interventionist industrialization strategy.
In Argentina, the terms of trade deteriorated considerably even before the
collapse of the international economic order in the early 1930s (see Fig. 4). During
the 1920s, on average, the terms of trade were approximately 30% below the preFirst-World-War level of 1913. Such a shock alone merits the label of a reverse of
fortune. For a country with a ratio of exports to GNP of one-to-three, a 30%
deterioration in the terms of trade represents a loss in real income of about onetenth, assuming no change in physical output. The 1930s show some recovery in
relative prices, which still were, on average, about 16% below their 1913 level. This
reversal of fortune, with some pronounced ﬂuctuations, continued throughout the
rest of the twentieth century. Just to put this into perspective, the average terms of
trade for the period 1930–1999 was 20% below the average relative prices for the
period 1890–1913. Nevertheless, in recent years the terms of trade have improved
substantially.
The protectionist measures enacted by most countries in the world and the
increased risk of sending goods overseas during wartime reduced trade opportunities
beyond what would be expected as a result of the terms of trade. To sum up, in the
late ninetieth century, Argentina had highly auspicious opportunities to trade with
the rest of the world: favorable terms of trade, peace and the application of free
trade policies by its trading partners. The terms of trade did not start to decline until
early in the twentieth century and were then followed by war and protectionist
policies.
4.3 Endogenous industrialization
The deterioration in the terms of trade during the 1920s severely damaged the
economy. At the same time that the proﬁtability of the primary sector was
plummeting because of low export prices, opportunities in the secondary sector
7

After successive rounds of negotiations, substantial tariff reductions were put into practice, mainly for
industrial products. Unfortunately for Argentina, distortions in the trade of agriculture products remained
relatively high. In the USA, subsidies to American farmers date from the Great Depression, whereas, in
Europe, protectionism in agriculture emerged in response to the food shortages that the continent suffered

200

150

100

50

2003

1995

1999

1991

1987

1983

1979

1975

1967

1971

1963

1959

1951

1955

1947

1943

1935

1939

1931

1927

1919

1923

1915

1911

1907

1899

1903

1895

1891

1887

1879

1883

1875

0

Fig. 4 Terms of trade, 1875–2006 (1993 = 100). Source ECLAC Ofﬁce in Buenos Aires

ﬂourished thanks to the natural protection provided by high import prices. As
indicated by the research of Villanueva (1972), the 1920s were a particularly active
period in terms of the development of the industrial sector in Argentina.
International conditions worsened again in the 1930s, leading to another wave of
endogenous industrialization. As the economy began to produce goods that it had
imported in the past, it naturally began to close itself off from the world economy.8
The decline in the terms of trade harmed both service workers and landowners.
However, the situation was less appalling for workers, since capital and labor were
shifting to the secondary sector. The ﬂow of workers to the urban secondary sector
was primarily composed of people from rural areas. Their welfare began to increase
as capital was reallocated to its most productive uses and as new manufacturing
activities prospered. In the model presented in the previous section, this is reﬂected
by a shift from specialization in production toward diversiﬁcation and trade.
The early industrialization process of the inter-war period was accompanied by
the consolidation of the labor movement. Argentine unions date back to 1877, but
active unionism did not start until the twentieth century. Union demands centered on
basic improvements in working conditions, some sort of insurance for work-related
injuries and the prohibition of child labor. As industry blossomed and wages rose
during the 1920s, the unions succeeded in having their demands met (see Galiani
and Gerchunoff 2003). The Great Depression put an end to the workers’ bonanza,
however. Unions tried, without much success, to prevent wages from falling, but
8

Of course, the size of the market played an important role in promoting industrialization. In others
words, the same shock, in a much poorer country, although might promote industrialization for export
conditions. The union movement was seen by employers as a lesser evil that would
maintain industrial peace, while workers saw it as a reliable tool for protecting their
rights. Unions thus emerged as an institutional device for coping with the conﬂict of
interest between capitalists and workers in the incipient process of industrialization
during the inter-war period. The battleground was the shop ﬂoor, and the conﬂicts
were mainly about the improvement of working conditions and wage stability.
It is somewhat ironic that the debate about protectionism became a permanent
ﬁxture in the national dialog in the wake of the Roca–Runciman Treaty, which was
devised to protect the Argentine primary sector and ensure exports to Great Britain.
In exchange, Argentina promised to reduce tariffs on British imports and made other
concessions to British companies that operated in the country. Although the treaty
was not fully honored by Argentina, it did spur the debate about the role of industry.
For the ﬁrst time, industrialists began to call for economic independence, selfsufﬁciency and autarky as Argentina’s answer to the new international order and
continued to do so during the uncertain period of the Second World War.
This process of import substitution intensiﬁed during the Second World War
under the shelter of the trade barriers associated with the war. By the end of the war,
the manufacturing sector was playing a signiﬁcant role in the economy, but
manufacturers were arguing that a strong policy of commercial protection and
subsidies was needed for them to survive, especially if the terms of trade were likely
´
to improve. It was under the leadership of General Peron, in the midst of a major
political shift, that these demands were to be fulﬁlled.
4.4 A new Argentina
The 1930s world economic crisis had profound effects on the economic and political
life of Argentina. Certainly, much of the development of Argentine foreign trade
seen during the 1930s, 1940s and early 1950s can be seen simply as a consequence
of trade agreements and exogenous shocks coming from the rest of the world. The
crisis and its immediate consequences were also a shock for the political life of the
country. By the same token, the economic changes that were occurring also
triggered major changes in the socioeconomic structure which ultimately created
conditions conducive to the development of a populist mass movement.
Argentine politics was monopolized by the landowning elite until 1916, when a
major political shift occurred thanks to an electoral reform law passed in 1912
which ushered in universal adult male suffrage (though it restricted the right to vote
of the large number of unnaturalized immigrants), secret ballots and compulsory
voting. Despite its apparently democratic implications, this reform was designed to
perpetuate the prevailing oligarchic system by extending the vote to the urban
middle class, whose members had taken part in the economic expansion in the sense
that they were working in the service sector, although they had been excluded from
the strongholds of power. Not surprisingly, the oligarchic elite that ruled the country
believed that middle-class workers were committed to maintaining the existing
to nearly one million adult males, but this was no more than approximately 40% of
the adult male population) was interrupted in 1930, when the army carried out a
coup and installed itself as the dominant factor in Argentine politics. Over time, the
popular base of the democratic system expanded. In 1946, 3.4 million adult males
´
had voting rights (see Canton 1968). Thus, the voice of the people in the Argentine
political system grew substantially between 1916 and 1946, despite the intervening
military coup. By 1946, the economic conﬁguration had changed dramatically. The
political alignment between landowners and workers had broken down. Instead,
workers—now mainly employed in the secondary sector—found their perfect ally in
the capitalists of the manufacturing sector, because their political preferences were
aligned both in the short and in the medium terms (see Sect. 3.2). Under Peronist
policies, more capital and labor shifted to the secondary sector, thereby furthering
the process of industrialization and consolidating both this alliance and the urban–
rural conﬂict.
At that point, distributive conﬂict between urban factors of production and
landowners emerged and paved the way for the possibility of populism as an
equilibrium point. Rogowski (1989), among others, argues that backward
economies with abundant natural resource endowments in which both labor and
capital are relatively scarce are likely to display political cleavages that are
protectionist in nature. The urban manufacturing sector will seek to protect itself, by
taxing both exports and imports, against rural activities. However, this analysis,
´
which was widely applied to Argentina during the Peron era, is at best incomplete,
as our model demonstrates. This prediction holds only for certain conﬁgurations of
the parameters of the model and certain histories. In particular, we stress that
protectionism and protectionist cleavages arise in resource-rich economies after the
potentially protected activities are initiated spontaneously in response to changing
market conditions (see also Galiani et al. (2010) for a discussion on the role of
skilled labor and unskilled labor in the formation of political coalitions in this
context).
By 1940, the labor movement had matured; moreover, industrial capitalists had
been aspiring to self-sufﬁciency and economic independence ever since 1930.
´
Conditions were therefore ripe for Peron to build a mass workers movement. He
started to engineer this when he was the Labor Secretary, right before he was elected
President in 1946. Industry-wide bargaining was instituted; labor courts were set up
to enforce the rather progressive new labor laws, social security coverage was
greatly expanded, minimum wages were increased and the system of aguinaldo (1
month’s extra pay at Christmas time) was introduced. Finally, Professional
Associations Act was adopted in 1945, which provided for the withholding of
union dues by employers, recognition of only one union organization per branch of
activity and direct union participation in political activity under state supervision.
As a result, the growth of union density during the 1940s was astonishingly rapid,
rising from 10% in 1936 to 40% in 1948 and to 49% in 1951 (see Galiani and
Gerchunoff 2003).
In this manner, a new national populist coalition was brought to power in 1946
´
the electoral reform. This pattern of opposition was replaced by one which had a
greater share of class content and was rooted in the expansion of social rights and
the political and social integration of the working classes. Indeed, the political
history of Argentina in the twentieth century is divided into two: before and after the
emergence of Peronism (see Torre 2002).
4.5 The Peronist era (1946–1955)
By 1950, most of the countries of Latin America had implemented an importsubstitution strategy. Although it was a pragmatic endogenous response to the
conditions created by the Great Depression of the 1930s and the Second World War,
this strategy was not necessarily the optimal response to the new international
conditions of the post-war era. To a great extent, the decision as to what sort of
strategy would be the best depended on what could be expected of the future
evolution of the international economy. By the late 1930s, it was reasonably clear
that the laissez-faire approach was ﬁnished in international economic relations. In
this context, the import-substitution strategy can be seen as a defensive measure
against an uncertain future of trading relations.
Clearly, world market conditions were more favorable to Argentina in
1943–1955 than in 1929–1943. After the war, policymakers had an option which
they had not had during the Great Depression: to guide economic growth on the
´
basis of expanding exports of both rural and manufactured products (see DıazAlejandro 1970). Indeed, this was explicitly attempted under the economic
leadership of Federico Pinedo during the early 1940s. Pinedo’s plan was a well
thought out attempt to recover the dynamism of the agricultural sector and to
promote export-led industrialization (see Llach 2002). However, Pinedo’s strategy
failed to take hold. One of the reasons for this failure is that it was opposed by the
new dominant electoral coalition formed by urban capitalists and workers, who
stood to beneﬁt from a deepening of the import-substitution strategy (see Sect. 3.3).
´
This electoral coalition would elect Juan Peron as President of the country in 1946
in what were arguably the ﬁrst truly free and democratic elections with universal
male suffrage.
´
Peron decided to consolidate the social base of his movement by redistributing
income to the working classes. In fact, he saw industrialization as a mean of
achieving the goals of his nationalistic and populist policy of increasing the real
consumption, employment and economic security of the masses of workers (see
Gerchunoff 1989).
Indeed, as Fig. 5 shows, the share of wages on GDP peaked during the Peronist
era. It is clear from the ﬁgure that the share of wages in GDP is lower when the
economy is integrated into the international economy than under autarky when the
secondary sector has exhausted its possibilities of import substitution. Notice that
this stylized fact is consistent with our model. In the long-run, the equilibrium
workers’ share is equal to (1 - /a - /m) ? (1 - b)(Ym/GDP), i.e., the share of
services in consumer preferences plus the share of labor in the secondary sector

200

150

100

50

18
84
18
88
18
92
18
96
19
00
19
04
19
08
19
12
19
16
19
20
19
24
19
28
19
32
19
36
19
40
19
44
19
48
19
52
19
56
19
60
19
64
19
68
19
72
19
76
19
80
19
84
19
88
19
92
19
96
20
00
20
04

0

Fig. 5 Share of wages in GDP (index: 1884 = 100). Source Gerchunoff and Llach (2004)

perhaps even in the medium run, workers not necessarily are better off under
autarky (see Sect. 3.3 and Proposition 7).
The Peronist policy of import substitution was not an integrated, well thought
plan. Rather, there was a great deal of improvisation in its application as
policymakers reacted to short-run economic and political pressures. Clearly, toward
the end of the war and during the early post-war years, the government’s main
concern was to defend the industries that had arisen and expanded prior to and
´
during the war, regardless of their efﬁciency (Dıaz-Alejandro 1970). The
protectionist measures that were used included not only high tariffs on imports of
goods that were also produced domestically, but also the requirement that farmers
sell their crops to a state trading monopoly9 that would proﬁt from the difference
between world prices and the prices paid to producers.
Import substitution gave the Peronist state control over resource allocation in the
economy. By deciding which industries to protect and where to channel national
credit, the Peronist government was able to discipline industrialists and determine
the destination of investment. Either industrialists complied with the demands of the
government or they were forced out and their capital was nationalized. The
´
nationalization of private capital and Peron’s military ambitions explain why the
government became so deeply involved in the economy. Labor was also kept in line
by the Professional Associations Act. Only one union was allowed to operate in
9

The Junta Reguladora de Granos, created in 1933, was transformed into the Instituto Argentino de
´
Promocion del Intercambio (IAPI) in 1946. The JRG and IAPI worked in very different ways. The JRG
operated in a period when external demand for agricultural products was weak. The goal of the JRG was
to control supply to prevent domestic prices from falling. It beneﬁted producers at the expense of
consumers. The IAPI worked in the opposite way in a period when external demand was strong. It
proﬁted from buying from domestic producers below international prices. As a result, domestic prices
could do so if two or more unions vied for the same branch. Outlawed unions had
their bank accounts frozen and their ofﬁces closed.
As a result, the Peronist government cemented a closed-economy and importsubstitution model for the years to come. The most important government
intervention during the period 1945–1975 was the introduction of a relative price
system which favored industry (and particularly labor-intensive industry) at the
expense of the agricultural sector. As a consequence, internal relative prices
diverged from international market prices, thus generating a sharp differential
(which put the agricultural sector at a disadvantage) between the internal and
´
external terms of trade (see Dıaz-Alejandro 1970; Mallon and Sourrouille 1975).
The triumph of the industrialization model under a closed economy, over time, and
´
even after the demise of Peron, led to the adoption of a scheme of industrial
integration which consisted of completing every step of the production process,
from capital goods and inputs to ﬁnal goods, inside the country’s borders, in evident
contradiction with the post-war tendency of developed countries, whose trade was
and continues to be mainly intra-industry (see Llach 2002).
Behind these economic policy decisions, there was an alliance of economic and
political interests formed by unions, industrialists and the armed forces. Unions
consolidated their power by delivering better wages, working conditions and social
protection to their members. Industrialists had achieved a considerable level of
protection from competition. Finally, the military took the development of the steel
and oil industries under its wing. Although this alliance was evidently born after the
Peronist years, it had sufﬁcient resilience to last even through the military
governments and the periods of political proscription of Peronism (see, among
´
others, Halperın Donghi 1994; Llach 2002).10
Up to now, we have been assuming that the economy operated near the efﬁciency
frontier. This is reasonable if we assume that capital allocation and employment
decisions were made in a decentralized way by proﬁt-maximizing agents. However,
during Peronism and the years that followed until the collapse of the importsubstitution model, the assumption is hard to maintain. Capital was allocated on the
basis of political rather than economic considerations. Labor allocation was no less
distorted: public employment was used as a means of combatting unemployment;
moreover, unions regulated quantities and prices in their members’ labor markets to
the extent that they were politically able to do so.
Not surprisingly, income redistribution and industrial promotion policies rapidly
ran up against a formidable constraint: exports stagnated (see Brambilla et al. in this
volume). It is true that the stagnation of Argentine exports can be partly attributed to
the global closure of markets and to the protectionist policies applied by industrial
countries in agriculture that favored self-sufﬁciency (especially in Europe).
However, it is also true that Argentina underperformed even in comparison to
other countries that shared the same markets.

10
This alliance was very effective at maintaining and obtaining new rents from the state (see Mallon and
1928, one-fourth in 1938 and only one-eighth in 1954. It exported mainly primary
goods: corn, wheat, linen, wool and meat. The joint share of these ﬁve goods in
world trade declined from 8.6% in 1926–1929 to 3.9% in 1960. Nevertheless, the
fact that Argentina’s market share was halved during that period provides evidence
of Argentina’s decline relative to other agricultural exporters. Overall, if we
consider the world exports of these ﬁve primary products, Argentina accounted for
1.8% of those exports in the late 1920s and for only 0.4% in 1960. If we analyze
export trends by product, we see that, in that same period, Argentina’s market share
in corn decreased from 57% to 21%, in wheat from 20% to 9%, in linen from 73%
to 40% and in meat from 40% to 24%, while its market share in wool remained
unchanged at around 6% (see Llach 2006). The stagnation of Argentine exports
placed an inescapable constraint on the country’s growth.
In sum, during Peronism Argentina embarked on an ambitious import-substitution industrialization process backed by a coalition of industrial capitalists and
workers. In the language of our model, the protectionist policies drove the economy
from the diversiﬁcation and trade area to a near-autarky situation.
4.6 A nation in Deadlock (1955–1973)
Toward the end of the 1950s, it was becoming clear that the world was entering a
new free trade era and that the woes of the inter-war mercantilist period were over.
However, taking advantage of the new international conditions required a painful
period of readjustment. In terms of our model, as capital ﬂows back to the primary
sector, industrial capitalist and workers suffer the most, whereas landowners beneﬁt
greatly. At the domestic level, it was also clear that the shift toward the consumption
frontier for mass-produced, labor-intensive domestic goods had come to an end.
Steel, machinery, motor vehicles and petroleum were the activities that were being
protected and promoted during this new phase of import substitution in Argentina,
and all of these industries were more capital intensive than those targeted during the
initial state of import substitution (see Mallon and Sourrouille 1975).
´
Peron himself, after being reelected by a landslide, was seeking an economic
alternative that would have inevitably entailed major economic and social
´
readjustments. Nonetheless, Peron had taken notice of the political risks of
departing from the path that had until that point driven him toward the ampliﬁcation
´
of redistributive policies and import-substitution strategies. Indeed, Peron was ready
to abandon nationalism to attract the foreign capital needed to sustain the deepening
of the import-substitution model, but not to revert the improvement in the
distribution of income achieved under that model. Under these conditions, the
armed forces abandoned their alliance with the unions and industrialists. Highranking ofﬁcers were becoming increasingly worried about the path that Argentina
´
´
was taking under Peron’s rule. They silently plotted against Peron and forced him to
withdraw in 1955.
Interestingly enough, all the governments between 1955 and 1973 tried, to the
extent of their possibilities, to deepen the import-substitution process, which was
its own and that, even though it had no way to survive, simply refused to die
´
(Halperın Donghi 1994).
On average, export incentives were larger during the period 1955–1973 than
during the ﬁrst post-war decade. But the policy tilt toward import substitution and
away from exports remained a feature of the Argentine economy during the period
1955–1976. Argentina’s effective rates of protectionism remained the highest in
´
Latin America (Dıaz-Alejandro 1984). Protectionism and hostility toward the rural
producers of the pampas were hardly limited to the Peronist movement, neither was
a strong nationalist stance toward foreign capital. As with export incentives,
governments zigzagged in their policies toward foreign capital during this period.
However, foreign corporations were nonetheless used as key instruments in
expanding industrial production in consumer durables and in intermediate and
´
capital goods (Dıaz-Alejandro 1984).
These years also saw a steep increase in the consumption of services, many of
which were provided by highly educated workers, for whom there was a strong
demand in this sector. These educated workers began to break down the rural–urban
political cleavage (see Galiani et al. 2010). As a result, the shift toward the
promotion of more capital-intensive industries and the growth of a services sector
catering to high-income and upper-middle-income groups gradually eclipsed
distributionist protectionism.
Over time, sustained growth required more government intervention. The state
had to ﬁnance the deﬁcits run by public-sector enterprises, subsidize the substitution
of capital-intensive imports and promote non-traditional exports. Yet it became less
and less able to do so as trade revenues began to shrink under increasing autarky and
´
as the surplus enjoyed by the social security system created under Peron melted
away, turning into a deﬁcit by the mid-1960s. The inﬂation tax thus became the
adjustment variable for an increasingly conﬂict-ridden and inviable society (see
Mallon and Sourrouille 1975).
The alliance between industrialists and workers began to grow stale. Labor
unions faced a dilemma, since preventing wages from going down required limiting
the supply of workers, and they knew all too well that having fewer members
implied less power. They also knew, of course, that new investment in unionized
activities would allow them to achieve both higher employment and higher wages.
In sum, they needed modern and capitalized industries, but their own power kept
capitalists away. The solution to the dilemma was direct government intervention
and direct investment in industrial activities.
The alliance between workers and industrialists was also unstable. They both
wanted high protection for industry, and hence their interests were aligned in this
respect. However, their interests conﬂicted with respect to real wages. Thus, from
time to time, when the economy needed to adjust to its consumption possibilities,
the alliance would break down for a time (see O’Donnell 1977).
To complete this dim picture, some workers became increasingly disappointed
with their union leaders and found hope in the promises of a ‘‘socialist fatherland’’
made by leftist groups. These groups accused the landowners of serving foreign
being the outright expropriation of land and its redistribution among the people by
means of revolutionary violence.
To sum up, chronic inﬂation and recurrent cycles of recession and recovery—
associated with substantial changes in income distribution arbitrated by the state
(see Mallon and Sourrouille 1975; O’Donnell 1977)—were salient economic
features throughout this period (and even beyond it). At the same time, social and
political divisions grew increasingly tense, reaching such a point that violence
dominated the political and economic life of the country. As a result, Argentina
failed to regain its prosperity and to achieve a consensual political order; instead, it
was stumbling along in a volatile stalemate. The successive administrations proved
unable to prevent the progressive institutional decay of the country. Nevertheless,
the darkest hour for Argentina was yet to come.
4.7 Crisis and reforms (1973–2010)
The intervention of the state in the economy increased substantially during the
Peronist era and the next 20 years. There is a stark contrast between the
industrialization process of the period 1920–1945 and that of 1946–1975. In the
former, the private sector reacted to the shortage of foreign manufactured goods and
led the way toward endogenous industrialization. In the latter, the state took an
active role in deepening the import-substitution process. This led to decisions based
on political expediency rather than economic rationality.
The industrialization process was guided by an alternation of administrations
with different strategic objectives, so it is not surprising that, overall, we ﬁnd that it
failed to achieve self-sufﬁciency or even a more rational or coherent industrialization process. This led to an essentially disproportionate development process that
promptly ran into binding constraints: (a) the inadequate growth of exports was a
very serious obstacle to the industrialization process, which required growing inputs
of capital and intermediate goods; and (b) the intensiﬁcation of the industrialization
process, especially the development of heavy industry, required larger subsidies that
needed to be ﬁnanced in some way. The government’s inability to accomplish this
task with ﬁscal resources drove inﬂation up to levels that were inconsistent with a
healthy economic performance.
´
A ﬁnal populist experiment (under President Peron and then his wife) in the early
1970s ended up in economic and political disorder. On the political side, it failed to
curb the spiral of violence that leftist guerrillas had ignited in the late 1960s. On the
economic side, the oil crisis exposed the weakness of the import substitution
strategy. The increase in the price of imported oil, a vital input of the manufacturing
sector, fueled inﬂation and reduced real wages.11
A top-down disciplinarian military administration then took its place. The main
economic objective of this government was to reduce inﬂation. A signiﬁcant,
although gradual and partial, market-oriented ﬁnancial and trade liberalization
11
Recall that in our model, the oil price hike can be interpreted as a negative productivity shock to the
intransigent in its attitude toward the other groups within the weakened industrialist
alliance. In disciplining the unions, the military government not only suppressed
collective bargaining and other union rights, as it had at other times in the past, but
actually used its military might against union leaders, some of whom became
victims of kidnappings and forced disappearance at their hands. Nevertheless, the
unions were not entirely decimated and, after the return to democracy some years
later, they were again a very powerful social force in the country. Industrial
businessmen were also disciplined through trade liberalization measures.
The discipline imposed on both labor and capital was not reﬂected in ﬁscal
austerity. With favorable international conditions for credit, the military–industrial
complex was empowered, and public spending on infrastructure soared. Large
business groups were also able to modernize considerably thanks to their easy
access to cheap credit. Over time, both inﬂation inertia and the prevalence of large
ﬁscal deﬁcits made the exchange rate system of pre-announced gradual devaluations, which had been adopted to control inﬂation, unsustainable. Between 1979 and
1981, capital ﬂight amounted to around 20% of GDP, leaving the government
(which absorbed private sector external debt) with a hefty external debt that has
inﬂuenced the country’s economic performance ever since.
The country’s extraordinary debt rates paved the way for a ﬁscal and balance-ofpayments crisis that dominated the political and economic scene during the 1980s.
Throughout the 1980s, the Argentine economy posted the worst performance it had
turned in at any time since the end of the Second World War. Investment collapsed.
Per capita GDP decreased by approximately 20% between 1980 and 1989. Inﬂation
was above 100% for every year except 1986. Both the external debt and the debt-toexports ratio rose at an ominous pace. The dollarization of the economy deepened,
increasing its ﬁnancial fragility. Ultimately, in the presence of severe uncertainty at
a time when the country was making its ﬁrst democratic transition in decades, its
high inﬂation gave way to a short but devastating bout of hyperinﬂation.
It was only after a brutal episode of hyperinﬂation that a comprehensive reform
˜
process was adopted (see, among others, Acuna et al. 2007). In the wake of its trade
and ﬁnancial reforms of the 1970s, Argentina had embarked upon a process of
integration into the international economy. This was substantially deepened during
the 1990s, when the Peronist administration privatized state enterprises and
drastically reduced import tariffs and export duties. Labor unions, which had
blocked free trade policies since 1955, were unable to effectively oppose these
˜
reforms (see, however, Acuna et al. 2007, for a discussion of how the government
seduced union leaders into supporting the reformist agenda).
Although not without large social costs, measured by a substantial increase in
poverty and inequality (see Alvaredo et al. in this volume), this reform process
ﬁnally moved the Argentine economy toward a rational form of integration into the
world economy. The recovery of the agricultural sector and the growth of exports
have been spectacular (see Brambilla et al. in this volume). The surviving industries
are realistically competitive and largely oriented toward the manufacturing of the
natural resources with which the country is abundantly endowed (see Brambilla
having held ofﬁce for 18 years in the period 1990–2010. Its support base has
changed somewhat though. Now, its supporters can be found not only among
unionized workers and public employees, but also among a large number of
informal service workers and small rural producers. The challenge of the twentyﬁrst century for the Peronist party is to build an alliance with landowners and rural
producers in the pursuit of an export-led form of growth without losing the support
of the vast number of people living in poverty as a result of 50 years of economic
stagnation and a painful trade liberalization process. The prospects are not bright—
the Peronist party has increasingly used political clientelistic practices to retain the
support of the poorest segments of the population.
In the language of our model, the reform process initiated in the 1990s redirected
capital to the primary sector and labor to the tertiary sector within the area of
diversiﬁcation of production and trade. The balance of power shifted away from the
industrialists and toward the coalition of agricultural producers and service
providers. During the 2000s, the improvement in terms of trade has helped them to
consolidate their power. The distributional conﬂict has not disappeared; there are
urban sectors that would beneﬁt from an increase in protectionism. However, the
pro-agricultural coalition appears stronger than in the past. Indeed, in March 2008 a
government attempt to increase export taxes on soybeans and sunﬂower was met
with a nationwide lockout by farming associations. The proposal was ﬁnally
defeated in Congress after 4 months of large-scale demonstrations in urban areas
and road blocks in rural areas.12 However, as we learned from the country’s
experiences in the early twentieth century, such coalition between landowners and
service workers is viable only under favorable external conditions and it is
politically weak.

5 Why Argentina?
We have analyzed the economic history of twentieth-century Argentina as seen
through the prism of a model that is a tractable, yet seemingly adequate,
simpliﬁcation. The model allows us to derive the preferences or attitudes of each
socioeconomic group regarding protectionism. Without being explicit about the
political process that determines the taxes on international trade, we have been able
to support our main claim: the negative external shocks faced by the economy
during the ﬁrst half of the century spurred an endogenous industrialization process
that had a profound impact on the political landscape of the second half of the
century. Over the ﬁrst half, capital and labor were reallocated from the primary and
tertiary sectors to the secondary sector, and this changed the attitudes of the majority
of the population with respect to protectionism. The import-substitution industrialization process was, in part, a response to those attitudes.
12
In appendix B, we exploit this natural experiment to provide evidence that: (a) trade policies are still a
result: if labor is assumed to be employed less intensively in the production of the
exportable good, then protection should increase its real remuneration. However,
once we include the labor-intensive non-tradable sector, this prediction no longer
holds; with favorable terms of trade, wages can be higher under free trade (see also
Galiani et al. 2009).13 In this case, path dependence is introduced by assuming that
physical capital adjusts slowly and that impatient workers are the pivotal group in
the political process. The attitude of labor toward protectionism depends on the
allocation of capital that is assumed to be ﬁxed in the medium run. This is also very
relevant because it helps to explain the entire economic history of Argentina
between 1870 and the present within a uniﬁed framework. In contrast, in the
previous literature, the widely used Stolper–Samuelson theorem only helps to
understand the rise of the urban–rural political cleavage that appeared following the
Second World War, but it cannot account for the periods of integration into world
trade seen in the late nineteenth century and after the fall of the Berlin wall.
At ﬁrst sight, it seems that this type of path-dependent anti-trade trap could have
appeared in any economy; however, we claim that this is not the case. It is true that
endogenous protectionism can arise in almost any economy if we assume some
adjustment costs and persistent external volatility in the terms of trade. However, if
the underlying distributional conﬂict is not too intense, the economy can gradually
steer itself toward a more efﬁcient pattern of trade. It is the intensity of the
distributional conﬂict—determined mainly by technology and factor endowments—
and the inability to resolve it by institutional means that place Argentina in a special
situation.
Our model has three features that generate both path dependence and intense
distributional conﬂict. First, the production of the exportable good does not use the
pivot input—labor—intensively. Otherwise, the pivot group would tend to support
free trade policies in the short and medium run. Second, the exportable good is an
important component of the consumption bundle. Otherwise, it is possible to show
that, in the medium run, workers would prefer a tariff level that decreases with the
terms of trade; in that case, workers would prefer gradual liberalization as the terms
of trade improve. Third, at the point in time when the terms of trade worsen, the
economy has to have enough capital to start the endogenous industrialization
process. Poor economies that have not accumulated enough capital yet are less
prone to the severe distributional conﬂict described here. These three conditions ﬁt
fairly well for Argentina and point to what other economies we should look at in an
effort to discern protectionist traps. We focus on land-rich newly settled countries,
particularly Australia, since there is a long tradition of comparing Argentina with
´
Australia in the literature (see, among others, Dıaz-Alejandro 1984; Gerchunoff and
Fajgelbaum 2006).

13
With capital mobility, wages are a U-shaped function of the terms of trade. Wages are high either
under specialization and trade with favorable terms of trade, or under autarky or reversal of the terms of
There are a number of similarities between these two economies that make this
exercise of comparative history worthwhile. First, their initial endowments, that is,
the relative scarcity of labor relative to land, determined their position as exporters
of agricultural goods. Second, there is the natural emergence of manufacturing
sectors in response to the natural protection provided by exogenous international
conditions and the distance of main industrial centers. Third, there is the demand for
protectionism by urban manufacturing interests. As a result, both countries relied
heavily on tariffs and quantitative restrictions to trade to provide protection for their
manufacturing sectors. These policies were blamed for the relatively poor
performance of these economies and were eventually abandoned by the end of
the twentieth century, although not without opposition from vested interest groups.
Anderson (2002) states that ‘‘seven decades of import-substituting industrialization cost Australia dearly in terms of its comparative standard of living. In 1900,
Australia was arguably the highest-income country in the world on a per capita
basis. But by 1950 its rank had slipped to third; by 1970 it was eighth; and by the
1990s Australia was not even in the top twenty’’ and that ‘‘Australia’s comparatively poor growth performance for most of the twentieth century contrasts with
that of the ﬁnal decade, when Australia out-performed all other advanced economies
other than Ireland and Norway‘‘. The author claims that part of that success is
attributable to the ‘‘belated opening of the Australian economy to the rest of the
world’’.
The differences between these two cases start to appear when we focus on the
intensity of the distributional conﬂict and the institutional settings where this
conﬂict needed to be resolved. We claim that the Argentine distributional conﬂict
was more intense and that its institutions were weaker. As a result, while Australia
was able to overcome its conﬂict, Argentina was overwhelmed by it. Moreover,
international and geopolitical conditions helped to ease the Australian anti-trade,
trap but not the Argentinian one. In what follows, we stress some key differences
between these two economies and show how they contribute to our argument.
5.1.1 From endowments to institutions
Since its creation in 1901, the Australian Federation adopted protectionist trade
policies that were strengthened during the course of the twentieth century up until
1973, when the country entered into a gradual but steady process of liberalization
(see, among others, Anderson 1998, 2002; Anderson and Garnaut 1987; Corden
1996; Garnaut 2002).
The Australian gold rushes of the late ninetieth century sparked an early inﬂux of
immigrants who helped to consolidate a mining export sector. The mining sector
had powerful forward and backward industrial linkages that generated interest in
scientiﬁc and technical research, as well as giving rise to a unionized labor force
across the economy. The trade unions and entrepreneurs involved with mining
coalesced into political groups that opposed the creation of a ruling landowning
government of the Australian Federation. Two key issues on the political agenda
were the level of protectionism and immigration policy. The government
successfully passed the Immigration Restriction Act of 1901, which formed the
basis for the White Australia Policy. However, the government had to reach a
compromise with the Free Trade Party to set import tariffs in 1902.
Australian immigration policies have been substantially different from those of
Argentina. As mentioned before, the Argentine elite chose to promote immigration.
Argentina’s population went from 1.35 million in 1861 to 11.28 million in 1928,
while, in Australia, it went from 1.2 to 6.22 million. In Argentina, this decreased
wages and increased the return on land. Indeed, Taylor (1997) calibrates a general
equilibrium model to estimate the impact on wages of the massive ﬂow of
immigration to Argentina up to the First World War. His calibration suggests that
the ﬂow of immigration reduced real wages in Argentina by approximately 20%
from what wage levels would have been if immigration had not taken place.
What is more, and in spite of similar factor endowments, land was more
concentrated in Argentina than in Australia, where family-operated, medium-sized
farms were relatively more common. As a consequence, landowners in Australia did
not constitute an oligarchy as they did in Argentina; they were a broad social group
and were not a ruling class. Landlords in Australia never controlled the
governmental machinery as they did in Argentina (see Hirst 1979).
To sum up, by the beginning of the twentieth century, the Australian labor
movement was already mature and consolidated, had an active role in the
policymaking process and had successfully demanded protection and restrictions on
the ﬂow of immigrants. However, it was not a hegemonic party; it had to make
compromises with the Free Trade Party, which represented the interests of the
agricultural sector. In Argentina, the ruling elite had vested interests in the
agricultural sector and did not need to compromise with antagonistic interest
groups. Even before the 1930s crisis, Australia was already experiencing a
distributional conﬂict similar to the one described in our model, and it found
institutional ways to deal with it. In practice, Australia had a democratic
government, while Argentina had an autocratic government ruled by the oligarchic
landlord class.
Australia’s stronger institutions also translated into better policymaking. In 1921,
the Australian government moved to protect the industries that had expanded during
the war; however, recognizing that vested interest groups would attempt to inﬂuence
the policymaking process, it established the Tariff Board, an advisory body
composed of ‘‘disinterested experts’’ to provide technical advice to both the
Parliament and the Minister for Trade and Customs. This development had two
direct beneﬁts that would facilitate the process of liberalization. First, as noted, it
reduced the direct inﬂuence of interest groups. Second, it created a bureaucracy with
technical expertise on the matter.
The Australian factor endowment also helped to reduce the intensity of the
distributional conﬂict. While Argentine exports were mainly agricultural goods, an
trade policies were more harmful to Argentine workers.
5.1.2 Liberalization
By the late 1960s, there was consensus among Australian economists on the beneﬁts
of import liberalization. These views came to be adopted ﬁrst by the members of the
Tariff Board and then by politicians. However, public opinion continued to show
support for protectionism. Interestingly, the ﬁrst move toward liberalization was in
1973 under a government led by the Labor Party, whose constituents tended to be
stronger supporters of protection. From then on, Australia embarked on a gradual
but steady path toward free trade. This process was facilitated by favorable external
and internal conditions that reduced the intensity of the distributional conﬂict and by
properly functioning institutions that made intertemporal bargaining possible.
The rise of Eastern Asia as a potential trading partner that was interested not only
in Australian raw materials but also manufactures shifted the Labor Party’s views on
protectionism. Closer integration into the regional economy through trade
liberalization would increase the demand for exports of manufactures that were
´
more labor-intensive than traditional exports (see Dıaz-Alejandro 1984; Gerchunoff
and Fajelbaum 2006).
Not only Labor Party leaders, but also the Australian Council of Trade Unions
(labor) and the Business Council (mining and service industries) advocated free
trade. Recognizing the effects of protection on export performance, both farming
and mining groups joined the public debate. At a federal level, the exporting states
also supported liberalization. The textiles, clothing and footwear, and automobile
industries, which enjoyed ample protection, invested heavily in political activity
aimed at maintaining protectionism. However, these industries were already
declining by the mid-1970s and they were further weakened by successive tariff
reductions from then on (see Garnaut 2002).
These external and internal developments changed the nature of the distributional
conﬂict associated with trade policy. Only capitalists and workers employed in
import-competing activities would oppose liberalization in the short run. However,
as part of a gradual, steady and predictable process of liberalization, new capital
investments were redirected toward activities that were not dependent on protection,
while, at the same time, vested interests were not harmed. The role played by the
institutions and the political leadership that took part in this task is remarkable. The
political system was able to set long-term policy goals to guide economic activity
without imposing large adjustment costs in terms of output or employment.
In contrast, during the early 1970s, Argentina was immersed in what was
tantamount to a civil war in which leftist groups were trying to create a socialist
country that would expropriate the holdings of the oligarchic landlords and transfer
the land to poor rural workers. Even when the economy was opened to trade during
the second part of the 1970s, this was not done by consensus. Instead, it was the
result of a unilateral decision made by a military government aligned with landlords
and the capitalists that could survive integration with the world economy and that
during the 1990s, after a devastating episode of hyperinﬂation, by a government that
campaigned on a populist agenda. Both these attempts were abrupt and were
conducted as shock policies by political groups that had political power but did not
represent a consensus view on the part of the population. Thus, trade reform was
abrupt and did not provide any way to smooth out losses. Even today, when serious
attempts to restrict trade are being made by the current government, a large segment
of the population sees the two episodes of trade liberalization as disastrous.
To sum up, the distributional conﬂict in Australia was mitigated both by a
differential initial factor endowment that led to the appearance of different
organizations and institutions in society and, later, by the rise of East Asia as a
trading partner. Moreover, Australian institutions were well suited to pursue a
gradual process of adjustment to minimize the losses of those who had sunk
investments in protected industries, while Argentine institutions and organizations
did not display those capabilities. In a context of policy path dependence, all these
differences ended up making a substantial difference in the outcomes.

6 Concluding remarks
Up to the 1930s, Argentina was well integrated into the world economy and, though
some protectionism naturally developed after the Great Depression of the 1930s, it
was only after the Second World War that the country closed itself off from world
markets. It then remained in a situation close to autarky until the mid-1970s. It was
only after a long period of absolute economic decline and a devastating bout of
hyperinﬂation that a comprehensive program of reform and integration into the
world economy was adopted.
We use a model with two tradable goods and one non-tradable good. We assume
that Argentina has a comparative advantage in the production of agricultural goods.
Thus, it might or might not produce manufactured goods. It also produces services.
We assume that the agricultural good is produced in the primary sector using land
and capital, while the manufactured good is produced in the secondary sector using
labor and capital. Services are produced using labor only. We also assume that
capital moves between the primary and secondary sectors more slowly than labor
moves between the secondary and tertiary sectors. This gives rise to three different
time horizons: the short run (no factor reallocation), the medium run (only labor
adjusts) and the long run (full reallocation).
We show that import-substitution policies exhibit path dependence. Indeed, this
is a very important insight in understanding the economic history of Argentina. We
also use our model to characterize the demands for protectionist policies of the
different groups in the economy. In the short run, landowners, capitalists who have
invested in the primary sector and workers employed in the tertiary sector support
free trade policies. On the other hand, capitalists and workers in the secondary
sector support protectionist policies. In the medium run, workers behave as a group
run, workers will support free trade if the terms of trade are favorable enough.
Using the insights derived from our model, we then argue that much of the
distributional conﬂict that arose was among owners of different production inputs
and that trade policies were widely used to shift income across groups. At the
beginning of the century, factor allocation resembled what we call ‘‘specialization
and trade.’’ During the inter-war period, trade opportunities and the terms of trade
worsened, which led to an incipient industrialization process. Argentina started the
second half of the century with a very different economic conﬁguration, as
industrialization had come a long way in terms of what we refer to as diversiﬁcation
and trade. These new economic conditions also changed the political equilibrium.
Urban workers employed in the manufacturing sector and industrialists were now
major social actors who demanded that the industrialization process be deepened,
which hurt trade and took the economy close to autarky. The years that followed the
Second World War witnessed an extraordinary expansion of trade in which
Argentina was not an active participant. We contend that one important reason
behind this outcome was the set of protectionist policies that were enacted in the
years following that war and that the main supporters of these policies were the new
political forces that emerged from the industrialization process in the inter-war
period.
The second half of the century was characterized by a strong distributional
conﬂict centered on trade policy. Traditional sectors composed of owners of factors
employed in the primary sector supported free trade policies, whereas the newer
political forces supported protectionism and import substitution. Argentina
embarked on an ambitious process of import substitution that aimed at achieving
self-sufﬁciency, especially in activities deemed strategic, such as oil and steel. As
domestically produced goods were substituted for labor-intensive imported
manufactures, the industrial sector grew and drew inputs from other sectors. The
substitution of capital-intensive activities was more problematic. Some of these
activities were not proﬁtable even though they had a captive internal market. With
little regard for economic rationality, the government took an active role in
developing these activities through public enterprises that became a chronic source
of deﬁcits.
Instead of delivering a steady path of inward-oriented growth, the importsubstitution strategy resulted in bumpy cycles of economic expansion followed by
sharp recession. Liberalization promised a return to export-led growth; however, in
the case of agents with vested interests in protected activities, it would cost them
dearly. The protectionist coalition, industrial capitalists and unionized workers, had
enough political power to keep liberalization off the policy agenda.
The accomplishment of gradual liberalization process that mitigated the losses of
those with vested interests and the deﬁnition of clear and sound long-term policy
goals required a set of political institutions capable of enforcing intertemporal
agreements between political groups. Sadly, Argentina lacked such institutions.
Instead, the dismantlement of the import-substitution strategy came only after the
protectionist coalition had become sufﬁciently weakened. The steps taken toward
population. Moreover, it did not provide any way to smooth out the losses. As a
result, Argentina’s integration into world markets was extremely costly in terms of
inequality and poverty.
Argentina had to wait to reap the beneﬁts of liberalization until the ﬁrst decade of
the twenty-ﬁrst century, when favorable commodity prices in world markets fueled
rapid economic growth. As the primary sector gained in productivity and received
large capital inﬂows and as employment in the tertiary sector soared, the demand for
protectionism was reduced. However, the distributional conﬂict centered on trade
policy survived the turn of the century and remains important.

Lat Am Econ Rev (2018)27:5
DOI 10.1007/s40503-017-0047-4

Path-dependent import-substitution policies: the case
of Argentina in the twentieth century
´
Sebastian Galiani1 • Paulo Somaini2,3

Received: 19 July 2017 / Revised: 15 September 2017 / Accepted: 30 September 2017
Ó The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication

Abstract We use a simple three-sector model to narrate the economic history of
Argentina during the twentieth century as seen through the prism of its integration
into and dis-integration from the world economy. Assuming that capital moves
between the primary and secondary sectors more slowly than labor moves between
the secondary and tertiary sectors, we show that import-substitution policies exhibit
path dependence. We contend that the endogenous industrialization of the inter-war
period generated political changes that paved the way for import-substitution
industrialization during the post-war period. Even if this inward-oriented strategy
failed to spur economic growth, protectionist policies became entrenched. In the
absence of mature political institutions, the liberalization process was delayed and,
when it ﬁnally did occur, it was extremely costly.
Keywords Trade policy Á Import substitution Á Trade liberalization Á Protectionism
JEL classiﬁcation N10 Á N17 Á D72 Á D78

& Paulo Somaini
soma@stanford.edu
´
Sebastian Galiani
galiani@econ.umd.edu
1

Department of Economics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA

2

Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, CA, USA

3

Argentina tends to grow relatively faster when its economy is integrated into world
markets. Why, then, did it remain closed to world trade for 60 years during the twentieth
century? In this paper we contend, like many other authors have in the past (see, among
´
others, Dıaz-Alejandro 1970, 1984; Mallon and Sourrouille 1975; O’Donnell 1977;
Waisman 1987; Rogowski 1989; Gerchunoff 1989; Taylor 1994; Gerchunoff and Llach
2004), that a severe distributional conﬂict lies at the core of this phenomenon. In
Argentina, for a large part of the twentieth century, what was efﬁcient was not popular. In
the words of one insightful economic historian of the Argentine Republic:
‘‘… Argentina is too transparently a Stolper–Samuelson country where a zerosum view of economic policy is plausible in the short and even the medium term’’
´
(Dıaz-Alejandro 1984).
The ideas behind the Stolper–Samuelson theorem explain the increasingly
pronounced urban–rural political cleavage seen in the aftermath of the Second
World War; however, they do not explain the process of integration into world
markets. We show that these processes can be understood once we add a nontradable sector and frictions in the mobility of capital across sectors. Under these
conditions, free trade can beneﬁt all factors of production. However, even if that is
the case, protectionism may persist if political institutions are not able to enforce
long-term agreements between political actors.
Up to the 1930s, Argentina was well integrated into the world economy and,
although some protectionism naturally arose in the wake of the worldwide crisis of
the 1930s, it was only after the Second World War that the country closed its
economy off from world markets and then remained in a situation close to autarky
until the mid-1970s. It was only after a long period of absolute economic decline
and devastating hyperinﬂation that an intensive program of reform and integration
into the world economy was adopted.
In this paper, we present a simple three-sector model to narrate the economic
history of Argentina during the twentieth century as seen through the prism of its
integration into and dis-integration from the world economy. In our model, the
primary sector uses land and capital to produce agricultural goods; the secondary
sector employs labor and capital to produce manufactured or industrial goods; and
the tertiary sector uses only labor to produce services. We assume that (as in fact is
the case) Argentina has a comparative advantage in the production of agricultural
goods. Thus, the economy exports agricultural goods and imports manufactured
goods; services are non-tradable and are always produced in equilibrium. The
government’s intervention in the economy is limited to taxing trade and distributing
the proceeds among the relevant agents.
We characterize the steady-state equilibria of this economy and show that the
economy could operate under specialization and trade, where neither labor nor
capital is employed to produce manufactured goods; under diversiﬁcation and trade,
where the manufacturing sector is active in production; or under autarky, where
there is no trade (for the sake of completeness, we also show that there are other
socioeconomic groups: workers, landowners and capitalists. We use our model to
characterize these different groups’ demands for protectionist policies. Assuming
that capital moves between the primary and secondary sectors more slowly than
labor moves between the secondary and tertiary sectors, we show that importsubstitution policies exhibit path dependence. Indeed, this is a very important
insight into understanding the economic history of Argentina.
Using the insights derived from our model, we then argue that much of the
distributional conﬂict that arose during that period was among owners of different
production factors and that trade policies were widely used to shift income across
groups. At the beginning of the century, the country specialized in the production of
primary goods and was highly integrated into world trade. During the inter-war
period, trade opportunities and the terms of trade worsened and this led to an
incipient industrialization process. Argentina started the second half of the century
with a very different economic conﬁguration. Industrialization had come a long
way, and integration into world markets was weak. These new economic conditions
also changed the political equilibrium; urban workers employed in the manufacturing sector and industrialists were now major social actors and they were
demanding protectionist policies. Traditional sectors comprising owners of factors
employed in the primary sector, on the other hand, supported free trade policies.
This distributional conﬂict surrounding trade policy shaped the politics of the
second half of the century.
The years that followed the Second World War were a time of an extraordinarily
rapid expansion of trade, in which Argentina was not an active participant. Instead,
it embarked on an ambitious process of import-substitution industrialization that
resulted in bumpy cycles of economic expansion followed by sharp recessions.
Argentina had the opportunity to return to an export-led growth strategy, but the
new political forces that emerged from the industrialization process during the interwar period were able to block any attempt to liberalize.
Liberalization could have been achieved gradually, thus mitigating the losses of
those with vested interests in protected activities. However, it would have required a
set of political institutions capable of enforcing intertemporal agreements between
political groups. Sadly, Argentina lacked such institutions (see Spiller and Tommasi
2009). Instead, the dismantlement of the import-substitution strategy came only
after a substantial deterioration of economic and political conditions. The steps that
were then taken toward liberalization were abrupt and applied as shock policies by
political groups that had political power but that did not represent a consensus of the
Argentine population. As a result, Argentina’s integration into world markets
proved to be extremely costly in terms of inequality and poverty.
Our main thesis is that the interplay of economic and political forces that were
spurred by international conditions during the inter-war period trapped the country
into an anti-trade equilibrium which limited economic growth. The conditions that
generated the anti-trade trap in Argentina, however, should have also generated the
same effect in other new-settler, land-rich economies. This poses a pressing
question: Was Argentina the only economy that fell into an anti-trade trap? We
and outcomes.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we relate our work
with the existing literature and explain why we focus on trade policy. In Sect. 3, we
set up and solve the model. In Sect. 4, we interpret the economic history of
Argentina during the twentieth century as seen through the prism of our model. In
Sect. 5, we compare Argentina with another new-settler, land-rich economy:
Australia. Finally, in Sect. 6, we present our conclusions.

2 Why is trade policy important?
There is a vast amount of literature on the decline of Argentina during the twentieth
century, and a wide variety of factors have been identiﬁed as causes of its dismal
economic performance. However, there is broad agreement in the literature that this
period was marked by a severe distributional conﬂict that shaped the politics and the
´
economics of the country (see, among others, Dıaz-Alejandro 1970, 1984; Mallon
and Sourrouille 1975; O’Donnell 1977; Waisman 1987; Rogowski 1989; Gerchunoff 1989; Taylor 1994; Gerchunoff and Llach 2004).
Essays on Argentine economic history usually describe, in more or less detail, the
periods of economic crisis that alternated with stability and recovery; this is usually
´
referred to as a ‘‘stop-and-go’’ process (see Dıaz-Alejandro 1970; Mallon and
Sourrouille 1975; Gerchunoff and Llach 2004). These authors note that the crises
were usually caused by overvaluation of the domestic currency, high inﬂation and
current account deﬁcits, whereas stabilization generally involved some combination
of ﬁscal austerity, devaluation and price controls. Once the economy had been
stabilized, the government resumed its proﬂigate behavior which led inevitably to
yet another ‘‘stop’’. These stop-and-go cycles were closely linked to the real
exchange rate or to the relative price of tradables versus non-tradables; stabilization
required a real devaluation, whereas government deﬁcits generated real
appreciation.
We will focus on a different relative price: the terms of trade, i.e., the price of
exports relative to the price of imports. We will also discuss the effect of
protectionism on such relative prices as perceived by economic actors. To isolate
the analysis from the effect of the real exchange rate, we build a model in which
there is no debt and the trade balance has to be balanced in every single period.
The real exchange rate is a key element in analyzing short-term debt management
problems, short-term capital ﬂows and agents’ perceived wealth (Heymann 1984).
However, long-run trends in terms of trade and persistent trade policies are key to an
understanding of long-term investment and capital reallocation in the economy.
Ultimately, these factors are more inﬂuential in shaping the political and economic
landscape. That is why our narrative deals with general developments over a span of
decades rather than delving into the details of each one of the sudden stops that
plagued Argentina during this period.
For at least 50 years, successive Argentine governments intentionally distorted
distortions altered the allocation of resources in the economy, which in turn affected
the political equilibrium.
Finally, we do not minimize the role of organizations and institutions in shaping
´
the course of history (North 1990; Cortes-Conde 1998). As we argue in this paper,
once the import-substitution development strategy had proven to be inefﬁcient,
liberalization measures could have been instituted gradually to mitigate the losses of
those with vested interests in protected activities. A gradual but steady process of
liberalization would have required consensus among different interested groups and
a mature institutional framework capable of limiting the incumbent government’s
ability to discretionally introduce major shifts in trade policy and beneﬁt some
groups at the expenses of others. Argentina lacked such institutions and as a result
trade liberalization occurred abruptly, without consensus and too late.

3 A simple model
In this section, we introduce a simple model that we use to articulate the analytical
discussion in the next section. We use a model with two tradable goods and one
non-tradable good. The tradable goods are labeled as agricultural (a) and
manufactured (m). The agricultural good is produced in the primary sector, using
land and capital, while the manufactured good is produced in the secondary sector,
using labor and capital. The non-tradable good (n) is labeled as a service and is
produced using labor only. The economy is endowed with K units of capital, T units
of land and L units of labor.
The tradable goods are produced using the following Cobb–Douglas production
functions:1
a
Ya ¼ AT 1Àa Ka ;
b
Ym ¼ ML1Àb Km :
m

The non-tradable good is produced with the following linear technology:
Yn ¼ Ln ;
where Yi is the total output of good i and Ki (Li) is the amount of capital (labor)
employed in sector i 2 {a, m, n}. A(M) is the total factor productivity in the primary (secondary) sector. We assume that capital is used more intensively in the
secondary sector: 0 B a B b B 1. We also assume that there are many competitive
ﬁrms in each sector, which allows us to cast the model in terms of a representative
ﬁrm of the sector that behaves competitively.
1

The parameters A and M in the production functions of the tradable goods can be interpreted as neutral
technological shocks. However, if the production function were instead to include an additional imported
input with a low elasticity of substitution, then an increase in the price of that input could be interpreted as
types of agents: workers, endowed with one unit of labor; landowners, endowed
with equal shares of the total rewards to land; and capitalists, endowed with equal
shares of total capital. Agents consume the three goods (a, m, n), for which they
have identical preferences as represented by a Cobb–Douglas utility function:2
Uj ¼ /a lncaj þ /m lncmj þ ð1 À /a À /m Þlncnj ;
where cij is the consumption by agent j of good i. We will use Ci to denote aggregate
consumption for good i.
We assume that the Argentine economy is a price-taker in world markets.
Therefore, the international prices for the agricultural good pa and the manufactured
good pm are considered exogenous. The terms of trade are denoted by p = pa/pm,
i.e., the relative price of exports over imports. We also assume the absence of any
international capital markets; therefore, trade should be balanced in equilibrium.
The government intervenes in the economy by taxing trade. Without loss of
generality, we assume that the government introduces an ad valorem tax on exports
at rate s. We conﬁne our attention to taxes on exports of the primary good. Since the
equilibrium depends on relative prices, the effect of any tax on imports can be
replicated by a tax on exports (Lerner symmetry result). Because we are interested
in Argentina, which is a country with comparative advantages in the primary sector,
we will not fully develop the case in which the pattern of trade reverses. If the
economy reverses its pattern of trade, we assume that export taxes (on the
manufactured good) are zero. The economic agents take the export tax, s, as given.
Unless the country is in autarky, domestic prices are given by pd ¼ pa ð1 À sÞ and
a
pd ¼ pm , where the nominal exchange rate is normalized to 1. We assume that the
m
government reinjects the tax proceeds into the economy via lump-sum transfers to
agents.

3.1 The long-run equilibrium
In the long-run equilibrium, ﬁrms hire capital and labor competitively and produce
according to their production functions, while consumers sell their endowments to
the ﬁrms and buy the produced goods with the proceeds. In the appendix, we solve
for the long-run equilibrium of this economy (see Sect. 7.1). Here, we will highlight
our results.
It will be useful, for our purposes, to consider the preferences parameters (/i), the
technological parameters (a and b) and the endowments of the economy as being
ﬁxed. We will focus on the effects of changes in the terms of trade (p) and export
duties (s). As shown in the appendix, there are four types of long-run equilibria:
•

Specialization: the country produces only in the primary and tertiary sectors; it
imports the manufactured good and exports the agricultural good.

2

Homogeneity of degree one allows us to ignore distributional issues in computing the steady state of the
economy and studying its equilibrium properties. Unitary elasticity of substitution also simpliﬁes the

Page 7 of 53 5

Diversiﬁcation and trade: the country produces in the three sectors; it imports
the manufactured good and exports the agricultural good.
Autarky: the country produces in the three sectors; there is no trade.
Diversiﬁcation and reversal of the pattern of trade: the country produces in the
three sectors; it imports the agricultural good and exports the manufactured
good.

Each pair (p, s) is associated with one and only one of these equilibria; therefore,
under the assumptions made, we can represent the areas or regions that correspond
to each of these types of long-run equilibria in the (p, s) plane:
Notice that, for a given tax rate s, as the terms of trade worsen (p decreases), the
economy moves from specialization to diversiﬁcation and trade, to autarky and,
ﬁnally, to a reversal of the patterns of trade. For higher levels of taxes s, the autarky
region is larger.
Consider the share of capital employed in the secondary sector: j = Km/
(Km ? Ka). This is a measure of industrialization that will be useful in our
discussion about preferences for protectionism. Figure 2 shows how this share
varies in the long-run equilibrium for different conﬁgurations of terms of trade and
taxes. A ﬁgure for k = Lm/(Lm ? La) would look similar.
Notice that the specialization region in Fig. 1 coincides with the region where j
equals zero in Fig. 2. Under specialization and trade, capital and labor employment
in the secondary sector are zero.
In the autarky region, the tax rate is set high enough so that the country will not
trade with the rest of the world; consequently, changes in p or s will have no
marginal effect on the resulting allocation of resources in the economy. For any
point in the region, the factor allocation is the autarky allocation, which we denote
as jaut and kaut (see Sect. 7.1.1 in the appendix). The autarky region in Fig. 1
coincides with the region with j = jaut in Fig. 2.
In the diversiﬁcation and trade region, the manufacturing sector employs capital
and labor. As we move upward and to the left within this region, both j and k
increase from zero, as in the frontier with the specialization and trade region, up to
jaut and kaut in the autarky region. The diversiﬁcation and trade region in Fig. 1
coincides with the region where j is increasing in Fig. 2.
Finally, in the reversal of patterns of trade region, the tax rate on agricultural
exports has no effect on the real economy. As p decreases, the secondary sector
grows and employs more resources. The reversal region in Fig. 1 coincides with the
leftmost region in Fig. 2. As the terms of trade worsen, the share of capital in the
secondary sector approaches one; however, the share of labor, k, converges toward
an upper bound that is less than one, since some workers are always employed in the
tertiary sector.
It seems appropriate to make two remarks about our model and its usefulness in
analyzing the Argentine economy. First, we have simpliﬁed the analysis to two
tradable sectors. Therefore, our model does not allow for an equilibrium in which
some manufactures are exported while others are imported. This is due to the
assumption that manufactures are a homogeneous good. A careful interpretation of

history. The manufacturing sector should be interpreted as comprising the activities
that compete with imports, the primary sector as the set of activities oriented toward
the international market and the tertiary sector as the services and manufactures that
are naturally protected from external competition. Thus, our model assumes that
exportable activities are intensive in capital and land, import-competing manufactures in labor and capital, and non-tradables in labor.
Second, we should interpret the autarky equilibrium as representing a situation
in which the economy has exhausted its possibilities of import substitution, rather
than as an actual autarkic situation. During the period under consideration,
Argentina was never in actual autarky; however, it took its import-substitution
strategy almost all the way to its technological limit. Of course, there were some
inputs that had to be imported because it was simply not feasible to produce them
domestically.3

3

We can reinterpret our model to accommodate an imported input. For a linearly homogeneous Cobb–
Douglas production function on K; L and the imported input F, we can write the value-added function
VA ¼ Y À pf F. If F is chosen optimally for a given pf , K, and L, then the value-added function is also a
linearly homogenous Cobb–Douglas on K and L. Our production functions should be reinterpreted as
value-added functions. An increase in the international price of the imported input can be reinterpreted as

3.2 Political economy
Our assumption that each agent owns a single type of input allows us to group
agents according to the input they own and the industry where they are employed.
As we show below, the tax rate s affects the real remuneration of each of these
groups in a different way. Some groups will gain from an increase in protectionism
(higher s), while others will lose. Thus, there is a distributional conﬂict around
protectionism.
Notice that no conﬂict would arise in an economy where each agent owns the
same bundle of inputs. Yet, agents endowed with different resources have
conﬂicting interests. The essence of the rivalry between proponents of free trade
and advocates of protectionism lies in the assumption that each agent can be
identiﬁed with one of the socioeconomic groups based on the inputs that the agent
owns and the industry in which the agent is employed.
The reader will recall that we have assumed that tax revenues are distributed in
lump-sum transfers to agents; thus, the agents’ attitudes will also depend on the
share of total tax revenues that each one of them expects to receive. Since we do not
specify who the recipients of the lump-sum transfers are, we should bear in mind
that, even if a group’s real remuneration is reduced by an increase in export taxes,
theorem, it is impossible to put each and every agent in a better off position by
increasing the tax rate and redistributing the revenues.
In analyzing the effect of changes of s on each group’s welfare, we consider the
short-, medium- and long-run time horizons. In the short run, no reallocation of
factors takes place. In the medium run, only labor is allowed to move between the
secondary and tertiary sectors. In the long run, all factors can be reallocated, and the
economy fully adjusts to its new long-run equilibrium.
In Appendix 1 (Sect. 7.2.1), we show that the diversiﬁcation and trade region is
particularly prone to distributional conﬂict. This is because, in the other regions,
either all interests are aligned (under specialization) or a marginal change in the
export tax rate has no real consequences (under reversal of the pattern of trade and
autarky). Therefore, we will focus on pairs (p, s) such that the economy will be in
the diversiﬁcation and trade region.
In the short run, protectionist policies will beneﬁt owners of factors employed in
the secondary sector and will harm those employed in the primary and tertiary
sectors. Since the proportion of factors employed in the secondary sector increases
as we move upward and toward the left in the diversiﬁcation and trade region,
protectionist policies have more short-run support as we move closer to the autarky
region and less support as we move closer to the specialization area (see Proposition
3 in Appendix 1).
In the medium run, landlords and capitalists with investments in the primary
sector will oppose protectionism, while capitalists with investments in the secondary
sector will support it. Workers will now have a homogenous attitude toward s;
either all workers will prefer protectionism or all of them will oppose it. We show
that the pairs of (p, s) at which workers switch from opposing protectionist policies
to supporting them lies in the diversiﬁcation and trade region (see Proposition 5 in
Appendix 1) (Fig. 3).
In the long run, landlords will always oppose protectionist policies and will
beneﬁt from improvements in terms of trade (Proposition 6, Appendix 1). One of
our key results is that workers will also prefer a zero tax rate if p is sufﬁciently high
(Proposition 7, Appendix 1). In this case, workers prefer to be employed in the
tertiary sector where they can take advantage of the high level of national income
induced by high terms of trade. The result for capitalists is similar; for a sufﬁciently
high p, farsighted capitalists will also support free trade policies.
The key insight that we want to convey here is that agents will support or oppose
policies according to their source of income and their relevant time horizon. In the
diversiﬁcation and trade region, agents’ attitudes toward protectionism exhibit an
interesting pattern. Landlords oppose them in all cases; capitalists employed in the
manufacturing sector support them both in the short and medium terms.4 Who
4

We will assume that capitalists are not farsighted. We are careful to draw the distinction between
different time horizons in view of the fact that capital is not perfectly mobile across sectors. If we were to
assume that capital is, in fact, not mobile at all and that capital reallocation occurs only through a process
in which depreciated capital in one sector is not replaced while the other sector has a positive net rate of
investment, then it would make perfect sense to assume that capitalists whose capital is already locked

prevails in this struggle depends on several factors that are beyond the scope of this
paper; however, our analytical model gives us some mileage in answering this
question. It seems fairly reasonable that the size of the capitalist faction that
supports protectionism will be positively correlated with the likelihood of these
policies being enacted. Moreover, in a democracy, workers could be the pivotal
faction that shifts the balance of power.
Clearly, as we move upward and to the left in the diversiﬁcation and trade region,
protectionist policies will enjoy wider support. As we move in this direction, both
workers and capitalists will be more likely to advocate these policies. In the short
run, there will be more workers and capitalists employed in the manufacturing
sector. In the medium run, workers as a whole group are also more likely to prefer
taxation.5
This model can also generate endogenous pressure for the enactment of free trade
policies in a protected economy that experiences favorable terms of trade or high
levels of productivity in the primary sector. As p grows, farsighted workers will
stand to beneﬁt greatly from free trade policies. Landlords’ remuneration under free
trade is greater when p is large, and they will therefore support these policies more
actively. Consequently, if the economy is trapped in the autarky equilibrium, higher
p will intensify the distributional conﬂict because those who want to challenge the
status quo have more incentives to do so.

5

There is a signiﬁcant difference between the outcomes in the short and medium terms. In the medium
run, workers are a homogeneous group and, when they change their preferences toward protectionism,
they do so as a group. In the short run, only those employed in the secondary sector will support
We will now discuss how, starting from a situation of specialization, a signiﬁcant
and exogenous worsening of the terms of trade may lead to an incipient
industrialization process, change the ‘‘political equilibrium’’ and lead to the
introduction of an import-substitution policy. Interestingly enough for our case
study, even if the terms of trade were to later rebound to the previous level at which
the economy operated under specialization, new endogenous political forces may
have developed that prevent the economy from returning to its initial stance. As in
the cases of path dependence discussed in the literature on inefﬁcient institutions
(see, among others, North 1990), there are self-reinforcing mechanisms for the
persistence of import-substitution policies.
Suppose that the economy is specialized in the primary sector. In that case, the
preferences of all agents in the economy are aligned; they all agree on a zero export
tax rate. Naturally, this does not mean that they agree on the level of redistribution
by other means such as an income tax, but we are abstracting from the analysis of
these issues here. Suppose that the terms of trade worsen signiﬁcantly and that the
country naturally initiates an incipient industrialization process, i.e., the economy
moves into diversiﬁcation and trade. Initially, protectionist policies will lack
support, since most of the capital is still employed in the primary sector and most
workers produce services. If workers take into account the medium-run prospects,
they may favor an increase in s; however, for most of them, it is likely that the shortrun costs of a tax increase would outweigh the medium-run beneﬁts.
As the process of industrialization deepens, either because of a further
deterioration in the terms of trade or because of capital ﬂows from the primary to
the secondary sector, the short- and medium-run support for protectionist policies
increases and eventually these policies may be implemented. Protectionism tends to
be self-reinforcing, since now more capital and labor will ﬂow to the secondary
sector. New waves of demand for protectionism drive the economy toward autarky,
which might be characterized as an import-substitution strategy. Notice, however,
that for this to happen, either the economy has to have a high level of capital—i.e.,
to be rich enough—to transfer capital from the primary sector to the manufacturing
sector, and the shock has to be sufﬁciently long-lasting to allow the economy to
accumulate enough capital in the manufacturing sector to give rise to a protectionist
coalition.
Suppose now that, once the economy is industrialized and the import-substitution
strategy has driven the economy close to autarky, the terms of trade improve. In the
short run, this harms all the agents who have switched to the secondary sector.
However, if these agents hold political power, they will not allow capital to ﬂow
back to the primary sector; instead, they will increase the export tax. If the tax is
increased to levels that ensure autarky, the improvement in the terms of trade will
not have any real effect. The economy will be trapped in a situation where every
improvement in the terms of trade will be neutralized and nobody will gain (or lose)
from it.
If the terms of trade improve, the distributional conﬂict becomes more intense.
the beneﬁt of reducing the level of protectionism increases with the terms of trade.
They will be opposed by industrial capitalists and shortsighted workers who beneﬁt
from protectionism. This distributional conﬂict may grow in intensity, destabilizing
the political equilibrium and, depending on how the conﬂict is resolved, spurring
liberalization. Similarly, the distributional conﬂict will also become more severe if
the productivity in the primary sector increases.
The next subsection deals with other forces that may give rise to trade
liberalization, not through increased distributional conﬂict, but by weakening the
protectionist political coalition of workers–capitalists.
3.4 Forces leading to trade liberalization
Events that reduce the proportion of workers and capital in the manufacturing sector
will weaken the coalition that supports protectionist policies. We have discussed
how an increase in the price or productivity of the agricultural sector may generate
enough distributional conﬂict to prompt the formation of a coalition of landlords and
longsighted workers that supports liberalization. In this subsection, we show what
other kinds of events can shift employment and capital allocation when the
economy has traveled far enough down the road of protectionism.
In our basic model, protectionism will lead the economy somewhere near
autarky. The assumptions of Cobb–Douglas preferences and technology imply that
the shares of labor and capital (k and j) in autarky depend only on the Cobb–
Douglas shares (a, b, /m and /a) and not on factor endowments or productivity (see
Sect. 7.1.1 in Appendix 1). This will not be the case if we relax the Cobb–Douglas
assumption. We can ﬁrst relax the assumption of unitary elasticity of substitution in
preferences and technology. We can go even further and relax the homotheticity
assumption. We note that, if preferences are elastic but technologies are not, the
share of workers employed in the secondary sector decreases with both population
growth and productivity in the primary sector.
Finally, we conjecture that labor unions that were created or empowered to
maintain and support protectionist policies also generated frictions in the labor
market that ended up depriving them of their most vital input: unionized workers.
3.4.1 Relaxing the Cobb–Douglas assumption
In this section, we analyze how shocks to factor endowments and productivity can
change the factor allocation of an economy in autarky. As shown in Sect. 7.1.1 in
the Appendix, if preferences and technology are Cobb–Douglas, then the shares of
labor and capital (k and j) in autarky will depend only on the parameters (a, b, /m
and /a), rather than on factor endowments or productivity. However, under more
general preferences or technologies, capital and labor shares will depend on
productivity and endowments.
In Sect. 7.3 in the appendix, we show how changes in endowments or
productivity can shift the allocation of labor and capital if we relax the assumption
would result in a smaller share of workers employed in the manufacturing sector
(lower k); however, we will focus on just two shocks: population growth and
technological improvements in the agricultural sector.
Population growth will decrease k if the EoS in consumption is greater than the
EoS in the production of manufactures. The intuition is that an increase in the
number of workers will push wages down. As a result, both manufactures and
services will become cheaper. However, the percentage fall in price will be sharper
in services (i.e., services will become cheaper relative to manufactures) because
services employ only labor. The increase in the demand for services will be directly
related to consumers’ elasticity of substitution. Because labor becomes cheaper, the
manufacturing sector will become more labor intensive. The increase in demand for
labor in the secondary sector will be related to the elasticity of factor substitution. If
consumers’ preferences exhibit more elasticity of substitution than manufacturing
ﬁrms’ technology, the share of workers employed in the service sector will increase.
A similar argument shows that the shift in the share of capital, j, will have an
opposite sign from the shift in k. Therefore, under these circumstances, we may
expect to see that, as population grows, k decreases and j increases.
Higher productivity in the agricultural sector will reduce k if the EoS in
preferences is greater than 1 and greater than the EoS in the technology of
manufactures.6 Moreover, the share of capital, j, will decrease if the EoS in
preferences is greater than 1. The intuition is that an increase in productivity in the
agricultural sector will depress the autarky price of the primary good and increase
the return of capital. High substitution elasticity in consumption implies that
consumers will increase the share of primary goods in their bundles and that capital
will move from the secondary to the primary sector. Low elasticity of substitution in
the manufacturing sector implies that the marginal productivity of labor in that
sector will decrease rapidly as a consequence of decapitalization; therefore, labor
will shift to the tertiary sector.
Alternatively, if preferences and technology are not homothetic, then it is
possible to obtain decreasing k and j following exogenous shocks if they change the
total income of the economy or total production of a particular good. For example, if
the manufacturing sector becomes more capital intensive, then the autarky
equilibrium will result in a smaller k and a larger j. Similarly, if preferences
shift toward services as income grows, then neutral technological improvements or
increases in all endowments will reduce k as more workers become employed in the
service sector. Moreover, if the share of total income represented by food
expenditures tends to decrease and food is produced in the primary sector, then the
primary sector will tend to shrink under autarky (i.e., j increases). More
importantly, since the primary good has less weight in the consumption bundle,
the impact of trade liberalization on workers and industrial capitalists is less
harmful.

6

It will also reduce k if the EoS in consumption is less than 1 and less than the EoS in the production of
We have discussed how protectionist policies shift labor and capital employment to
the secondary sector, which reinforces the political demand for protectionist
policies. So far, we have abstracted from the institutions and organizations that
might emerge to represent these demands. As we will argue later, labor unions were
organized and empowered during the Peronist period and were key actors during the
following 40 years. Labor unions’ most visible role was not lobbying for
protectionism, but intervening in the wage-setting and employment decisions of
manufacturing ﬁrms to keep real wages high and avoid layoffs. In this section, we
will explain why, if the number of workers in the economy is increasing, unions’
zeal to prevent wage declines will lead to an increase in the share of workers
employed in the service sector and to their ultimate loss of political power.
Labor unions can inﬂuence wages in two basic ways. First, by restricting the
access of workers to the manufacturing sector (e.g., enforcing closed-shop
agreements), they can prevent wage equalization between the secondary and
tertiary sectors and maintain a positive industrial wage premium in the medium and
long run. Second, through aggressive collective bargaining, they can obtain a higher
share of total remuneration and reduce the return to capital in the sector in the
medium run. In an environment where the relative supply of workers is increasing,
unions will have to rely on some of these interventions if they are to keep real wages
from falling.
If labor unions effectively restrict access to the manufacturing sector, the service
sector will absorb a disproportionately high number of new workers in the medium
run and long run. This will result in a growing share of workers employed in the
service sector being opposed to the labor unions; they will be against both restricted
access and protectionist policies.
On the other hand, if labor unions can use their market power to set wages above
the value of the marginal product of labor, then the remuneration of capital in
unionized activities will decrease. In the long run, capital will ﬂow to alternative
uses, such as agriculture or non-unionized manufacturing activities. Decapitalized,
unionized manufacturing activities will not hire new employers and, as a result,
union membership will decline in relative terms.
In both of the cases reviewed above, unions’ objectives of keeping wages high
and avoiding layoffs of union members run counter to their long-run survival in a
context where population growth outpaces capital accumulation.
3.5 Lessons from the model
The key result of our model is the ﬁnding that protectionist policies are pathdependent. A land-rich economy that is well integrated into world markets may
embark upon an industrialization process in response to poor terms of trade,
especially if the new prices are not a transient shock. This incipient industrialization
process is possible if the economy has enough capital—i.e., if it is rich enough—and
labor; otherwise, the secondary sector will not be proﬁtable and the economy will
recently employed in the industrial sector have incentives to lodge demands for
protectionism. As the process advances, the political power of these groups grows
and, eventually, their demands may be met. As a consequence, the industrial sector
receives a new boost at the expense of the primary and tertiary sectors, and the
economy gradually becomes closed to world markets. Moreover, the political
coalition supporting protectionism gains power. As a result, anti-trade policies
become entrenched and the economy moves closer to autarky. Even if the
conditions that gave rise to the endogenous industrialization subside, the economy
remains closed, since the alliance of capitalist and workers retains its power.
However, the anti-trade alliance is not unbreakable. Secular trends in labor
supply, frictions between workers and capitalists or a strong improvement in terms
of trade can push the economy back into a free trade equilibrium:
Under more general preferences and technology, population growth and higher
productivity in the primary sector can shift the factor allocation and lead to
increased demands for free trade. In both cases, under some conditions, a greater
share of workers will be employed in the service sector. Therefore, more workers
will support liberalization.
Similarly, if services gain in importance in the consumption bundle, more
workers will be employed in the tertiary sector. As a result, there will be greater
support for liberalization. Moreover, even the owners of inputs employed in the
secondary sector will have weaker incentives to support protectionism if this shift
toward services occurs at the expense of the consumption of the exportable good.
Once the economy is near autarky, capitalists and workers will not be able to use
their coalition’s political power to pursue further industrialization. Besides, they
will be extremely vulnerable to negative shocks in industrial productivity (e.g., an
increase in the price of a non-modeled importable input). Under these circumstances, unions may be tempted to use their power against capitalists, thereby
weakening their alliance. We have discussed how unions, in their zeal to keep wages
from falling in the short run, may introduce distortions that reduce their power in the
long run.
Finally, an improvement in terms of trade or an increase in agricultural
productivity increases the incentives for landlords to intervene in the political
process. The economy will be able to escape the anti-trade trap if landlords are
successful in challenging the coalition of industrial workers and capitalists.

4 Analytical narrative
Argentina did relatively well when it was integrated with world markets. Why, then,
did it remain under autarky for approximately 60 years? We will now use the model
outlined in the previous section to articulate an analytical narrative concerning the
4.1 The Belle Epoque
In 1860, Argentina was a fairly empty land. As in the rest of Latin America, the pace
and characteristics of Argentine expansion were fundamentally determined by the
success with which some of its regions became exporters of primary products (see
´
Cortes-Conde 1979). The period from 1870 to 1914 was one of free trade and
market integration and during this period the country beneﬁted from its marked
comparative advantage in the primary sector due to its vast amount of highly fertile
land (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999). The dramatic decline in transport costs
during the late nineteenth century led to a trade boom and commodity price
convergence internationally. In Argentina, the scarcity of labor and abundance of
land, relative to Europe, induced a high marginal product of labor. The wage
differential between Argentina and some European countries attracted a colossal
ﬂow of overseas immigrants, who came to constitute the majority of Argentina’s
labor force. A similar process also triggered a massive ﬂow of capital into the
´
country (see Cortes-Conde 1979).
During the second half of the ninetieth century, a large proportion of Argentine
land was settled and divided up into latifundia (Adelman 1994). The sharp increase
in the availability of land spurred an expansion in livestock raising, primarily
because it was a non-labor-intensive activity that could be launched at a time when
labor was a scarce resource.
With the pattern of land ownership determined by political history, and with
prices of exports, imports and capital set by international markets, total rents
depended on the labor supply. Therefore, immigration policy became the critical
´
policy variable under the control of the government (Dıaz-Alejandro 1984). Not
surprisingly, the Argentine elite chose to promote immigration. The expansion of
agricultural activities and a pro-immigration policy paved the way for a very
substantial increase in the urban population, especially in Buenos Aires. In addition
to its administrative functions as the capital of the country, this city developed an
increasingly large and sophisticated service sector.
The export-oriented growth made possible by an expanding international market
raised per capita income in a sustained and substantial way. Indeed, the growth
process was closely related to successive booms in the exports of land-intensive
commodities, with land having a very low opportunity cost. The economic
usefulness of the pampas was not discovered overnight, as an oil deposit might be,
but instead arose as the result of the combination of a growing European need for
primary goods, technological progress in transport and an increasing interest on the
part of Argentine policymakers in promoting exports, foreign investment and
immigration. By the beginning of the twentieth century, however, the Argentine
growth process had become less dependent on the discovery of new resource-based
export commodities and on the performance of any one export. It still relied heavily,
however, on a steady expansion of exports based on the growth of the world
economy and on the completion of the adjustment by which primary production was
´
supplied the domestic market with products that were naturally protected from
external competition, (e.g., wine, meat and ﬂour). There also was a smaller
industrial sector that competed with imports (e.g., clothes, cigarettes, perfumes).
These industries were granted some degree of protection after the passage of the
Customs Act of 1876. However, the level and extent of protectionism were rather
´
limited compared to what was yet to come (Gomez-Galvarriato and Williamson
2009). First, the main goal of these customs duties was to obtain revenues for the
government, which was a widely accepted practice in Latin America at the time (see
Brambilla et al. in this volume). Second, the protected activities accounted for a
small share of total economic activity and, to a large extent, the policy was geared
toward protecting regional products as a means of preserving the federalist model
adopted by the country. Thus, this speciﬁc departure from free trade can be more
accurately interpreted as a means of securing revenues and of sustaining a political
order that, on the whole, was pro-export oriented.
Thus, in our view, the period from 1870 to 1914 was one of specialization in
production, with the country specializing in the production of primary goods,
importing manufactured goods and employing its workers mainly in the primary
sector and the services industry. This was therefore a period in which the political
views of the majority of economic agents were aligned against protectionist
policies.
4.2 Globalization backlash
It is not clear whether Argentina could have sustained its fast pace of growth under
specialization (see Llach in this volume) if the world had remained widely
´
integrated, as it was during the Belle Epoque. However, there is no reason why it
should not have diversiﬁed its production and exports of agricultural and
manufactured goods under a policy of free trade. Had the terms of trade remained
favorable for Argentina, even if the productivity of the primary sector had not kept
increasing rapidly, some manufacturing sectors would have eventually become
competitive and taken off. What is more, if the economy had continued to expand, it
would have begun to meet an increasing (but previously inexistent) domestic
demand for many manufactured goods, thereby encouraging their domestic
production, particularly in view of the existence of natural barriers. The same
reasoning applies to services (see Galiani et al. 2008).
Instead, the country’s fortune took a sharp turn for the worse in the 1930s. World
trade collapsed after the Great Depression. The 1932 Ottawa Conference marked the
end of multilateralism in international trade. Great Britain, Argentina’s foremost
trading partner, shifted its trade to members of the Commonwealth. A protectionist
pandemic spread throughout the world. As a consequence, the ratio of world trade
(export plus imports) to GDP declined from 22% in 1913 to 9% in the 1930s.
Though there was a recovery toward the end of the decade, international trade was
again disrupted during the Second World War, when it was geared toward war
requirements. Trade opportunities did not start to improve until after the Second
by 1950, it had surpassed pre-war levels, mostly thanks to the growth of transAtlantic and intra-European trade.7 There is a consensus that, after the Second
World War, a second globalization era began (see, among others, Baldwin and
Martin 1999; Williamson 2002). Nevertheless, the move toward multilateralism was
gradual and was not achieved, for all practical purposes, until the 1990s (see
Brambilla et al. in this volume for a fuller discussion of these issues).
The breakdown of the economic order was transmitted to Latin America ﬁrst of
all through a sharp change in relative prices: dollar export prices collapsed more
steeply than dollar import prices. According to Clemens and Williamson (2002), the
magnitude of the decline was around 30% for Asia and the Middle East and 40% for
Latin America. This decline in the terms of trade was used as a strong argument in
support of the move of the developing world toward autarky in the 1940s and 1950s,
within the context of a highly interventionist industrialization strategy.
In Argentina, the terms of trade deteriorated considerably even before the
collapse of the international economic order in the early 1930s (see Fig. 4). During
the 1920s, on average, the terms of trade were approximately 30% below the preFirst-World-War level of 1913. Such a shock alone merits the label of a reverse of
fortune. For a country with a ratio of exports to GNP of one-to-three, a 30%
deterioration in the terms of trade represents a loss in real income of about onetenth, assuming no change in physical output. The 1930s show some recovery in
relative prices, which still were, on average, about 16% below their 1913 level. This
reversal of fortune, with some pronounced ﬂuctuations, continued throughout the
rest of the twentieth century. Just to put this into perspective, the average terms of
trade for the period 1930–1999 was 20% below the average relative prices for the
period 1890–1913. Nevertheless, in recent years the terms of trade have improved
substantially.
The protectionist measures enacted by most countries in the world and the
increased risk of sending goods overseas during wartime reduced trade opportunities
beyond what would be expected as a result of the terms of trade. To sum up, in the
late ninetieth century, Argentina had highly auspicious opportunities to trade with
the rest of the world: favorable terms of trade, peace and the application of free
trade policies by its trading partners. The terms of trade did not start to decline until
early in the twentieth century and were then followed by war and protectionist
policies.
4.3 Endogenous industrialization
The deterioration in the terms of trade during the 1920s severely damaged the
economy. At the same time that the proﬁtability of the primary sector was
plummeting because of low export prices, opportunities in the secondary sector
7

After successive rounds of negotiations, substantial tariff reductions were put into practice, mainly for
industrial products. Unfortunately for Argentina, distortions in the trade of agriculture products remained
relatively high. In the USA, subsidies to American farmers date from the Great Depression, whereas, in
Europe, protectionism in agriculture emerged in response to the food shortages that the continent suffered

200

150

100

50

2003

1995

1999

1991

1987

1983

1979

1975

1967

1971

1963

1959

1951

1955

1947

1943

1935

1939

1931

1927

1919

1923

1915

1911

1907

1899

1903

1895

1891

1887

1879

1883

1875

0

Fig. 4 Terms of trade, 1875–2006 (1993 = 100). Source ECLAC Ofﬁce in Buenos Aires

ﬂourished thanks to the natural protection provided by high import prices. As
indicated by the research of Villanueva (1972), the 1920s were a particularly active
period in terms of the development of the industrial sector in Argentina.
International conditions worsened again in the 1930s, leading to another wave of
endogenous industrialization. As the economy began to produce goods that it had
imported in the past, it naturally began to close itself off from the world economy.8
The decline in the terms of trade harmed both service workers and landowners.
However, the situation was less appalling for workers, since capital and labor were
shifting to the secondary sector. The ﬂow of workers to the urban secondary sector
was primarily composed of people from rural areas. Their welfare began to increase
as capital was reallocated to its most productive uses and as new manufacturing
activities prospered. In the model presented in the previous section, this is reﬂected
by a shift from specialization in production toward diversiﬁcation and trade.
The early industrialization process of the inter-war period was accompanied by
the consolidation of the labor movement. Argentine unions date back to 1877, but
active unionism did not start until the twentieth century. Union demands centered on
basic improvements in working conditions, some sort of insurance for work-related
injuries and the prohibition of child labor. As industry blossomed and wages rose
during the 1920s, the unions succeeded in having their demands met (see Galiani
and Gerchunoff 2003). The Great Depression put an end to the workers’ bonanza,
however. Unions tried, without much success, to prevent wages from falling, but
8

Of course, the size of the market played an important role in promoting industrialization. In others
words, the same shock, in a much poorer country, although might promote industrialization for export
conditions. The union movement was seen by employers as a lesser evil that would
maintain industrial peace, while workers saw it as a reliable tool for protecting their
rights. Unions thus emerged as an institutional device for coping with the conﬂict of
interest between capitalists and workers in the incipient process of industrialization
during the inter-war period. The battleground was the shop ﬂoor, and the conﬂicts
were mainly about the improvement of working conditions and wage stability.
It is somewhat ironic that the debate about protectionism became a permanent
ﬁxture in the national dialog in the wake of the Roca–Runciman Treaty, which was
devised to protect the Argentine primary sector and ensure exports to Great Britain.
In exchange, Argentina promised to reduce tariffs on British imports and made other
concessions to British companies that operated in the country. Although the treaty
was not fully honored by Argentina, it did spur the debate about the role of industry.
For the ﬁrst time, industrialists began to call for economic independence, selfsufﬁciency and autarky as Argentina’s answer to the new international order and
continued to do so during the uncertain period of the Second World War.
This process of import substitution intensiﬁed during the Second World War
under the shelter of the trade barriers associated with the war. By the end of the war,
the manufacturing sector was playing a signiﬁcant role in the economy, but
manufacturers were arguing that a strong policy of commercial protection and
subsidies was needed for them to survive, especially if the terms of trade were likely
´
to improve. It was under the leadership of General Peron, in the midst of a major
political shift, that these demands were to be fulﬁlled.
4.4 A new Argentina
The 1930s world economic crisis had profound effects on the economic and political
life of Argentina. Certainly, much of the development of Argentine foreign trade
seen during the 1930s, 1940s and early 1950s can be seen simply as a consequence
of trade agreements and exogenous shocks coming from the rest of the world. The
crisis and its immediate consequences were also a shock for the political life of the
country. By the same token, the economic changes that were occurring also
triggered major changes in the socioeconomic structure which ultimately created
conditions conducive to the development of a populist mass movement.
Argentine politics was monopolized by the landowning elite until 1916, when a
major political shift occurred thanks to an electoral reform law passed in 1912
which ushered in universal adult male suffrage (though it restricted the right to vote
of the large number of unnaturalized immigrants), secret ballots and compulsory
voting. Despite its apparently democratic implications, this reform was designed to
perpetuate the prevailing oligarchic system by extending the vote to the urban
middle class, whose members had taken part in the economic expansion in the sense
that they were working in the service sector, although they had been excluded from
the strongholds of power. Not surprisingly, the oligarchic elite that ruled the country
believed that middle-class workers were committed to maintaining the existing
to nearly one million adult males, but this was no more than approximately 40% of
the adult male population) was interrupted in 1930, when the army carried out a
coup and installed itself as the dominant factor in Argentine politics. Over time, the
popular base of the democratic system expanded. In 1946, 3.4 million adult males
´
had voting rights (see Canton 1968). Thus, the voice of the people in the Argentine
political system grew substantially between 1916 and 1946, despite the intervening
military coup. By 1946, the economic conﬁguration had changed dramatically. The
political alignment between landowners and workers had broken down. Instead,
workers—now mainly employed in the secondary sector—found their perfect ally in
the capitalists of the manufacturing sector, because their political preferences were
aligned both in the short and in the medium terms (see Sect. 3.2). Under Peronist
policies, more capital and labor shifted to the secondary sector, thereby furthering
the process of industrialization and consolidating both this alliance and the urban–
rural conﬂict.
At that point, distributive conﬂict between urban factors of production and
landowners emerged and paved the way for the possibility of populism as an
equilibrium point. Rogowski (1989), among others, argues that backward
economies with abundant natural resource endowments in which both labor and
capital are relatively scarce are likely to display political cleavages that are
protectionist in nature. The urban manufacturing sector will seek to protect itself, by
taxing both exports and imports, against rural activities. However, this analysis,
´
which was widely applied to Argentina during the Peron era, is at best incomplete,
as our model demonstrates. This prediction holds only for certain conﬁgurations of
the parameters of the model and certain histories. In particular, we stress that
protectionism and protectionist cleavages arise in resource-rich economies after the
potentially protected activities are initiated spontaneously in response to changing
market conditions (see also Galiani et al. (2010) for a discussion on the role of
skilled labor and unskilled labor in the formation of political coalitions in this
context).
By 1940, the labor movement had matured; moreover, industrial capitalists had
been aspiring to self-sufﬁciency and economic independence ever since 1930.
´
Conditions were therefore ripe for Peron to build a mass workers movement. He
started to engineer this when he was the Labor Secretary, right before he was elected
President in 1946. Industry-wide bargaining was instituted; labor courts were set up
to enforce the rather progressive new labor laws, social security coverage was
greatly expanded, minimum wages were increased and the system of aguinaldo (1
month’s extra pay at Christmas time) was introduced. Finally, Professional
Associations Act was adopted in 1945, which provided for the withholding of
union dues by employers, recognition of only one union organization per branch of
activity and direct union participation in political activity under state supervision.
As a result, the growth of union density during the 1940s was astonishingly rapid,
rising from 10% in 1936 to 40% in 1948 and to 49% in 1951 (see Galiani and
Gerchunoff 2003).
In this manner, a new national populist coalition was brought to power in 1946
´
the electoral reform. This pattern of opposition was replaced by one which had a
greater share of class content and was rooted in the expansion of social rights and
the political and social integration of the working classes. Indeed, the political
history of Argentina in the twentieth century is divided into two: before and after the
emergence of Peronism (see Torre 2002).
4.5 The Peronist era (1946–1955)
By 1950, most of the countries of Latin America had implemented an importsubstitution strategy. Although it was a pragmatic endogenous response to the
conditions created by the Great Depression of the 1930s and the Second World War,
this strategy was not necessarily the optimal response to the new international
conditions of the post-war era. To a great extent, the decision as to what sort of
strategy would be the best depended on what could be expected of the future
evolution of the international economy. By the late 1930s, it was reasonably clear
that the laissez-faire approach was ﬁnished in international economic relations. In
this context, the import-substitution strategy can be seen as a defensive measure
against an uncertain future of trading relations.
Clearly, world market conditions were more favorable to Argentina in
1943–1955 than in 1929–1943. After the war, policymakers had an option which
they had not had during the Great Depression: to guide economic growth on the
´
basis of expanding exports of both rural and manufactured products (see DıazAlejandro 1970). Indeed, this was explicitly attempted under the economic
leadership of Federico Pinedo during the early 1940s. Pinedo’s plan was a well
thought out attempt to recover the dynamism of the agricultural sector and to
promote export-led industrialization (see Llach 2002). However, Pinedo’s strategy
failed to take hold. One of the reasons for this failure is that it was opposed by the
new dominant electoral coalition formed by urban capitalists and workers, who
stood to beneﬁt from a deepening of the import-substitution strategy (see Sect. 3.3).
´
This electoral coalition would elect Juan Peron as President of the country in 1946
in what were arguably the ﬁrst truly free and democratic elections with universal
male suffrage.
´
Peron decided to consolidate the social base of his movement by redistributing
income to the working classes. In fact, he saw industrialization as a mean of
achieving the goals of his nationalistic and populist policy of increasing the real
consumption, employment and economic security of the masses of workers (see
Gerchunoff 1989).
Indeed, as Fig. 5 shows, the share of wages on GDP peaked during the Peronist
era. It is clear from the ﬁgure that the share of wages in GDP is lower when the
economy is integrated into the international economy than under autarky when the
secondary sector has exhausted its possibilities of import substitution. Notice that
this stylized fact is consistent with our model. In the long-run, the equilibrium
workers’ share is equal to (1 - /a - /m) ? (1 - b)(Ym/GDP), i.e., the share of
services in consumer preferences plus the share of labor in the secondary sector

200

150

100

50

18
84
18
88
18
92
18
96
19
00
19
04
19
08
19
12
19
16
19
20
19
24
19
28
19
32
19
36
19
40
19
44
19
48
19
52
19
56
19
60
19
64
19
68
19
72
19
76
19
80
19
84
19
88
19
92
19
96
20
00
20
04

0

Fig. 5 Share of wages in GDP (index: 1884 = 100). Source Gerchunoff and Llach (2004)

perhaps even in the medium run, workers not necessarily are better off under
autarky (see Sect. 3.3 and Proposition 7).
The Peronist policy of import substitution was not an integrated, well thought
plan. Rather, there was a great deal of improvisation in its application as
policymakers reacted to short-run economic and political pressures. Clearly, toward
the end of the war and during the early post-war years, the government’s main
concern was to defend the industries that had arisen and expanded prior to and
´
during the war, regardless of their efﬁciency (Dıaz-Alejandro 1970). The
protectionist measures that were used included not only high tariffs on imports of
goods that were also produced domestically, but also the requirement that farmers
sell their crops to a state trading monopoly9 that would proﬁt from the difference
between world prices and the prices paid to producers.
Import substitution gave the Peronist state control over resource allocation in the
economy. By deciding which industries to protect and where to channel national
credit, the Peronist government was able to discipline industrialists and determine
the destination of investment. Either industrialists complied with the demands of the
government or they were forced out and their capital was nationalized. The
´
nationalization of private capital and Peron’s military ambitions explain why the
government became so deeply involved in the economy. Labor was also kept in line
by the Professional Associations Act. Only one union was allowed to operate in
9

The Junta Reguladora de Granos, created in 1933, was transformed into the Instituto Argentino de
´
Promocion del Intercambio (IAPI) in 1946. The JRG and IAPI worked in very different ways. The JRG
operated in a period when external demand for agricultural products was weak. The goal of the JRG was
to control supply to prevent domestic prices from falling. It beneﬁted producers at the expense of
consumers. The IAPI worked in the opposite way in a period when external demand was strong. It
proﬁted from buying from domestic producers below international prices. As a result, domestic prices
could do so if two or more unions vied for the same branch. Outlawed unions had
their bank accounts frozen and their ofﬁces closed.
As a result, the Peronist government cemented a closed-economy and importsubstitution model for the years to come. The most important government
intervention during the period 1945–1975 was the introduction of a relative price
system which favored industry (and particularly labor-intensive industry) at the
expense of the agricultural sector. As a consequence, internal relative prices
diverged from international market prices, thus generating a sharp differential
(which put the agricultural sector at a disadvantage) between the internal and
´
external terms of trade (see Dıaz-Alejandro 1970; Mallon and Sourrouille 1975).
The triumph of the industrialization model under a closed economy, over time, and
´
even after the demise of Peron, led to the adoption of a scheme of industrial
integration which consisted of completing every step of the production process,
from capital goods and inputs to ﬁnal goods, inside the country’s borders, in evident
contradiction with the post-war tendency of developed countries, whose trade was
and continues to be mainly intra-industry (see Llach 2002).
Behind these economic policy decisions, there was an alliance of economic and
political interests formed by unions, industrialists and the armed forces. Unions
consolidated their power by delivering better wages, working conditions and social
protection to their members. Industrialists had achieved a considerable level of
protection from competition. Finally, the military took the development of the steel
and oil industries under its wing. Although this alliance was evidently born after the
Peronist years, it had sufﬁcient resilience to last even through the military
governments and the periods of political proscription of Peronism (see, among
´
others, Halperın Donghi 1994; Llach 2002).10
Up to now, we have been assuming that the economy operated near the efﬁciency
frontier. This is reasonable if we assume that capital allocation and employment
decisions were made in a decentralized way by proﬁt-maximizing agents. However,
during Peronism and the years that followed until the collapse of the importsubstitution model, the assumption is hard to maintain. Capital was allocated on the
basis of political rather than economic considerations. Labor allocation was no less
distorted: public employment was used as a means of combatting unemployment;
moreover, unions regulated quantities and prices in their members’ labor markets to
the extent that they were politically able to do so.
Not surprisingly, income redistribution and industrial promotion policies rapidly
ran up against a formidable constraint: exports stagnated (see Brambilla et al. in this
volume). It is true that the stagnation of Argentine exports can be partly attributed to
the global closure of markets and to the protectionist policies applied by industrial
countries in agriculture that favored self-sufﬁciency (especially in Europe).
However, it is also true that Argentina underperformed even in comparison to
other countries that shared the same markets.

10
This alliance was very effective at maintaining and obtaining new rents from the state (see Mallon and
1928, one-fourth in 1938 and only one-eighth in 1954. It exported mainly primary
goods: corn, wheat, linen, wool and meat. The joint share of these ﬁve goods in
world trade declined from 8.6% in 1926–1929 to 3.9% in 1960. Nevertheless, the
fact that Argentina’s market share was halved during that period provides evidence
of Argentina’s decline relative to other agricultural exporters. Overall, if we
consider the world exports of these ﬁve primary products, Argentina accounted for
1.8% of those exports in the late 1920s and for only 0.4% in 1960. If we analyze
export trends by product, we see that, in that same period, Argentina’s market share
in corn decreased from 57% to 21%, in wheat from 20% to 9%, in linen from 73%
to 40% and in meat from 40% to 24%, while its market share in wool remained
unchanged at around 6% (see Llach 2006). The stagnation of Argentine exports
placed an inescapable constraint on the country’s growth.
In sum, during Peronism Argentina embarked on an ambitious import-substitution industrialization process backed by a coalition of industrial capitalists and
workers. In the language of our model, the protectionist policies drove the economy
from the diversiﬁcation and trade area to a near-autarky situation.
4.6 A nation in Deadlock (1955–1973)
Toward the end of the 1950s, it was becoming clear that the world was entering a
new free trade era and that the woes of the inter-war mercantilist period were over.
However, taking advantage of the new international conditions required a painful
period of readjustment. In terms of our model, as capital ﬂows back to the primary
sector, industrial capitalist and workers suffer the most, whereas landowners beneﬁt
greatly. At the domestic level, it was also clear that the shift toward the consumption
frontier for mass-produced, labor-intensive domestic goods had come to an end.
Steel, machinery, motor vehicles and petroleum were the activities that were being
protected and promoted during this new phase of import substitution in Argentina,
and all of these industries were more capital intensive than those targeted during the
initial state of import substitution (see Mallon and Sourrouille 1975).
´
Peron himself, after being reelected by a landslide, was seeking an economic
alternative that would have inevitably entailed major economic and social
´
readjustments. Nonetheless, Peron had taken notice of the political risks of
departing from the path that had until that point driven him toward the ampliﬁcation
´
of redistributive policies and import-substitution strategies. Indeed, Peron was ready
to abandon nationalism to attract the foreign capital needed to sustain the deepening
of the import-substitution model, but not to revert the improvement in the
distribution of income achieved under that model. Under these conditions, the
armed forces abandoned their alliance with the unions and industrialists. Highranking ofﬁcers were becoming increasingly worried about the path that Argentina
´
´
was taking under Peron’s rule. They silently plotted against Peron and forced him to
withdraw in 1955.
Interestingly enough, all the governments between 1955 and 1973 tried, to the
extent of their possibilities, to deepen the import-substitution process, which was
its own and that, even though it had no way to survive, simply refused to die
´
(Halperın Donghi 1994).
On average, export incentives were larger during the period 1955–1973 than
during the ﬁrst post-war decade. But the policy tilt toward import substitution and
away from exports remained a feature of the Argentine economy during the period
1955–1976. Argentina’s effective rates of protectionism remained the highest in
´
Latin America (Dıaz-Alejandro 1984). Protectionism and hostility toward the rural
producers of the pampas were hardly limited to the Peronist movement, neither was
a strong nationalist stance toward foreign capital. As with export incentives,
governments zigzagged in their policies toward foreign capital during this period.
However, foreign corporations were nonetheless used as key instruments in
expanding industrial production in consumer durables and in intermediate and
´
capital goods (Dıaz-Alejandro 1984).
These years also saw a steep increase in the consumption of services, many of
which were provided by highly educated workers, for whom there was a strong
demand in this sector. These educated workers began to break down the rural–urban
political cleavage (see Galiani et al. 2010). As a result, the shift toward the
promotion of more capital-intensive industries and the growth of a services sector
catering to high-income and upper-middle-income groups gradually eclipsed
distributionist protectionism.
Over time, sustained growth required more government intervention. The state
had to ﬁnance the deﬁcits run by public-sector enterprises, subsidize the substitution
of capital-intensive imports and promote non-traditional exports. Yet it became less
and less able to do so as trade revenues began to shrink under increasing autarky and
´
as the surplus enjoyed by the social security system created under Peron melted
away, turning into a deﬁcit by the mid-1960s. The inﬂation tax thus became the
adjustment variable for an increasingly conﬂict-ridden and inviable society (see
Mallon and Sourrouille 1975).
The alliance between industrialists and workers began to grow stale. Labor
unions faced a dilemma, since preventing wages from going down required limiting
the supply of workers, and they knew all too well that having fewer members
implied less power. They also knew, of course, that new investment in unionized
activities would allow them to achieve both higher employment and higher wages.
In sum, they needed modern and capitalized industries, but their own power kept
capitalists away. The solution to the dilemma was direct government intervention
and direct investment in industrial activities.
The alliance between workers and industrialists was also unstable. They both
wanted high protection for industry, and hence their interests were aligned in this
respect. However, their interests conﬂicted with respect to real wages. Thus, from
time to time, when the economy needed to adjust to its consumption possibilities,
the alliance would break down for a time (see O’Donnell 1977).
To complete this dim picture, some workers became increasingly disappointed
with their union leaders and found hope in the promises of a ‘‘socialist fatherland’’
made by leftist groups. These groups accused the landowners of serving foreign
being the outright expropriation of land and its redistribution among the people by
means of revolutionary violence.
To sum up, chronic inﬂation and recurrent cycles of recession and recovery—
associated with substantial changes in income distribution arbitrated by the state
(see Mallon and Sourrouille 1975; O’Donnell 1977)—were salient economic
features throughout this period (and even beyond it). At the same time, social and
political divisions grew increasingly tense, reaching such a point that violence
dominated the political and economic life of the country. As a result, Argentina
failed to regain its prosperity and to achieve a consensual political order; instead, it
was stumbling along in a volatile stalemate. The successive administrations proved
unable to prevent the progressive institutional decay of the country. Nevertheless,
the darkest hour for Argentina was yet to come.
4.7 Crisis and reforms (1973–2010)
The intervention of the state in the economy increased substantially during the
Peronist era and the next 20 years. There is a stark contrast between the
industrialization process of the period 1920–1945 and that of 1946–1975. In the
former, the private sector reacted to the shortage of foreign manufactured goods and
led the way toward endogenous industrialization. In the latter, the state took an
active role in deepening the import-substitution process. This led to decisions based
on political expediency rather than economic rationality.
The industrialization process was guided by an alternation of administrations
with different strategic objectives, so it is not surprising that, overall, we ﬁnd that it
failed to achieve self-sufﬁciency or even a more rational or coherent industrialization process. This led to an essentially disproportionate development process that
promptly ran into binding constraints: (a) the inadequate growth of exports was a
very serious obstacle to the industrialization process, which required growing inputs
of capital and intermediate goods; and (b) the intensiﬁcation of the industrialization
process, especially the development of heavy industry, required larger subsidies that
needed to be ﬁnanced in some way. The government’s inability to accomplish this
task with ﬁscal resources drove inﬂation up to levels that were inconsistent with a
healthy economic performance.
´
A ﬁnal populist experiment (under President Peron and then his wife) in the early
1970s ended up in economic and political disorder. On the political side, it failed to
curb the spiral of violence that leftist guerrillas had ignited in the late 1960s. On the
economic side, the oil crisis exposed the weakness of the import substitution
strategy. The increase in the price of imported oil, a vital input of the manufacturing
sector, fueled inﬂation and reduced real wages.11
A top-down disciplinarian military administration then took its place. The main
economic objective of this government was to reduce inﬂation. A signiﬁcant,
although gradual and partial, market-oriented ﬁnancial and trade liberalization
11
Recall that in our model, the oil price hike can be interpreted as a negative productivity shock to the
intransigent in its attitude toward the other groups within the weakened industrialist
alliance. In disciplining the unions, the military government not only suppressed
collective bargaining and other union rights, as it had at other times in the past, but
actually used its military might against union leaders, some of whom became
victims of kidnappings and forced disappearance at their hands. Nevertheless, the
unions were not entirely decimated and, after the return to democracy some years
later, they were again a very powerful social force in the country. Industrial
businessmen were also disciplined through trade liberalization measures.
The discipline imposed on both labor and capital was not reﬂected in ﬁscal
austerity. With favorable international conditions for credit, the military–industrial
complex was empowered, and public spending on infrastructure soared. Large
business groups were also able to modernize considerably thanks to their easy
access to cheap credit. Over time, both inﬂation inertia and the prevalence of large
ﬁscal deﬁcits made the exchange rate system of pre-announced gradual devaluations, which had been adopted to control inﬂation, unsustainable. Between 1979 and
1981, capital ﬂight amounted to around 20% of GDP, leaving the government
(which absorbed private sector external debt) with a hefty external debt that has
inﬂuenced the country’s economic performance ever since.
The country’s extraordinary debt rates paved the way for a ﬁscal and balance-ofpayments crisis that dominated the political and economic scene during the 1980s.
Throughout the 1980s, the Argentine economy posted the worst performance it had
turned in at any time since the end of the Second World War. Investment collapsed.
Per capita GDP decreased by approximately 20% between 1980 and 1989. Inﬂation
was above 100% for every year except 1986. Both the external debt and the debt-toexports ratio rose at an ominous pace. The dollarization of the economy deepened,
increasing its ﬁnancial fragility. Ultimately, in the presence of severe uncertainty at
a time when the country was making its ﬁrst democratic transition in decades, its
high inﬂation gave way to a short but devastating bout of hyperinﬂation.
It was only after a brutal episode of hyperinﬂation that a comprehensive reform
˜
process was adopted (see, among others, Acuna et al. 2007). In the wake of its trade
and ﬁnancial reforms of the 1970s, Argentina had embarked upon a process of
integration into the international economy. This was substantially deepened during
the 1990s, when the Peronist administration privatized state enterprises and
drastically reduced import tariffs and export duties. Labor unions, which had
blocked free trade policies since 1955, were unable to effectively oppose these
˜
reforms (see, however, Acuna et al. 2007, for a discussion of how the government
seduced union leaders into supporting the reformist agenda).
Although not without large social costs, measured by a substantial increase in
poverty and inequality (see Alvaredo et al. in this volume), this reform process
ﬁnally moved the Argentine economy toward a rational form of integration into the
world economy. The recovery of the agricultural sector and the growth of exports
have been spectacular (see Brambilla et al. in this volume). The surviving industries
are realistically competitive and largely oriented toward the manufacturing of the
natural resources with which the country is abundantly endowed (see Brambilla
having held ofﬁce for 18 years in the period 1990–2010. Its support base has
changed somewhat though. Now, its supporters can be found not only among
unionized workers and public employees, but also among a large number of
informal service workers and small rural producers. The challenge of the twentyﬁrst century for the Peronist party is to build an alliance with landowners and rural
producers in the pursuit of an export-led form of growth without losing the support
of the vast number of people living in poverty as a result of 50 years of economic
stagnation and a painful trade liberalization process. The prospects are not bright—
the Peronist party has increasingly used political clientelistic practices to retain the
support of the poorest segments of the population.
In the language of our model, the reform process initiated in the 1990s redirected
capital to the primary sector and labor to the tertiary sector within the area of
diversiﬁcation of production and trade. The balance of power shifted away from the
industrialists and toward the coalition of agricultural producers and service
providers. During the 2000s, the improvement in terms of trade has helped them to
consolidate their power. The distributional conﬂict has not disappeared; there are
urban sectors that would beneﬁt from an increase in protectionism. However, the
pro-agricultural coalition appears stronger than in the past. Indeed, in March 2008 a
government attempt to increase export taxes on soybeans and sunﬂower was met
with a nationwide lockout by farming associations. The proposal was ﬁnally
defeated in Congress after 4 months of large-scale demonstrations in urban areas
and road blocks in rural areas.12 However, as we learned from the country’s
experiences in the early twentieth century, such coalition between landowners and
service workers is viable only under favorable external conditions and it is
politically weak.

5 Why Argentina?
We have analyzed the economic history of twentieth-century Argentina as seen
through the prism of a model that is a tractable, yet seemingly adequate,
simpliﬁcation. The model allows us to derive the preferences or attitudes of each
socioeconomic group regarding protectionism. Without being explicit about the
political process that determines the taxes on international trade, we have been able
to support our main claim: the negative external shocks faced by the economy
during the ﬁrst half of the century spurred an endogenous industrialization process
that had a profound impact on the political landscape of the second half of the
century. Over the ﬁrst half, capital and labor were reallocated from the primary and
tertiary sectors to the secondary sector, and this changed the attitudes of the majority
of the population with respect to protectionism. The import-substitution industrialization process was, in part, a response to those attitudes.
12
In appendix B, we exploit this natural experiment to provide evidence that: (a) trade policies are still a
result: if labor is assumed to be employed less intensively in the production of the
exportable good, then protection should increase its real remuneration. However,
once we include the labor-intensive non-tradable sector, this prediction no longer
holds; with favorable terms of trade, wages can be higher under free trade (see also
Galiani et al. 2009).13 In this case, path dependence is introduced by assuming that
physical capital adjusts slowly and that impatient workers are the pivotal group in
the political process. The attitude of labor toward protectionism depends on the
allocation of capital that is assumed to be ﬁxed in the medium run. This is also very
relevant because it helps to explain the entire economic history of Argentina
between 1870 and the present within a uniﬁed framework. In contrast, in the
previous literature, the widely used Stolper–Samuelson theorem only helps to
understand the rise of the urban–rural political cleavage that appeared following the
Second World War, but it cannot account for the periods of integration into world
trade seen in the late nineteenth century and after the fall of the Berlin wall.
At ﬁrst sight, it seems that this type of path-dependent anti-trade trap could have
appeared in any economy; however, we claim that this is not the case. It is true that
endogenous protectionism can arise in almost any economy if we assume some
adjustment costs and persistent external volatility in the terms of trade. However, if
the underlying distributional conﬂict is not too intense, the economy can gradually
steer itself toward a more efﬁcient pattern of trade. It is the intensity of the
distributional conﬂict—determined mainly by technology and factor endowments—
and the inability to resolve it by institutional means that place Argentina in a special
situation.
Our model has three features that generate both path dependence and intense
distributional conﬂict. First, the production of the exportable good does not use the
pivot input—labor—intensively. Otherwise, the pivot group would tend to support
free trade policies in the short and medium run. Second, the exportable good is an
important component of the consumption bundle. Otherwise, it is possible to show
that, in the medium run, workers would prefer a tariff level that decreases with the
terms of trade; in that case, workers would prefer gradual liberalization as the terms
of trade improve. Third, at the point in time when the terms of trade worsen, the
economy has to have enough capital to start the endogenous industrialization
process. Poor economies that have not accumulated enough capital yet are less
prone to the severe distributional conﬂict described here. These three conditions ﬁt
fairly well for Argentina and point to what other economies we should look at in an
effort to discern protectionist traps. We focus on land-rich newly settled countries,
particularly Australia, since there is a long tradition of comparing Argentina with
´
Australia in the literature (see, among others, Dıaz-Alejandro 1984; Gerchunoff and
Fajgelbaum 2006).

13
With capital mobility, wages are a U-shaped function of the terms of trade. Wages are high either
under specialization and trade with favorable terms of trade, or under autarky or reversal of the terms of
There are a number of similarities between these two economies that make this
exercise of comparative history worthwhile. First, their initial endowments, that is,
the relative scarcity of labor relative to land, determined their position as exporters
of agricultural goods. Second, there is the natural emergence of manufacturing
sectors in response to the natural protection provided by exogenous international
conditions and the distance of main industrial centers. Third, there is the demand for
protectionism by urban manufacturing interests. As a result, both countries relied
heavily on tariffs and quantitative restrictions to trade to provide protection for their
manufacturing sectors. These policies were blamed for the relatively poor
performance of these economies and were eventually abandoned by the end of
the twentieth century, although not without opposition from vested interest groups.
Anderson (2002) states that ‘‘seven decades of import-substituting industrialization cost Australia dearly in terms of its comparative standard of living. In 1900,
Australia was arguably the highest-income country in the world on a per capita
basis. But by 1950 its rank had slipped to third; by 1970 it was eighth; and by the
1990s Australia was not even in the top twenty’’ and that ‘‘Australia’s comparatively poor growth performance for most of the twentieth century contrasts with
that of the ﬁnal decade, when Australia out-performed all other advanced economies
other than Ireland and Norway‘‘. The author claims that part of that success is
attributable to the ‘‘belated opening of the Australian economy to the rest of the
world’’.
The differences between these two cases start to appear when we focus on the
intensity of the distributional conﬂict and the institutional settings where this
conﬂict needed to be resolved. We claim that the Argentine distributional conﬂict
was more intense and that its institutions were weaker. As a result, while Australia
was able to overcome its conﬂict, Argentina was overwhelmed by it. Moreover,
international and geopolitical conditions helped to ease the Australian anti-trade,
trap but not the Argentinian one. In what follows, we stress some key differences
between these two economies and show how they contribute to our argument.
5.1.1 From endowments to institutions
Since its creation in 1901, the Australian Federation adopted protectionist trade
policies that were strengthened during the course of the twentieth century up until
1973, when the country entered into a gradual but steady process of liberalization
(see, among others, Anderson 1998, 2002; Anderson and Garnaut 1987; Corden
1996; Garnaut 2002).
The Australian gold rushes of the late ninetieth century sparked an early inﬂux of
immigrants who helped to consolidate a mining export sector. The mining sector
had powerful forward and backward industrial linkages that generated interest in
scientiﬁc and technical research, as well as giving rise to a unionized labor force
across the economy. The trade unions and entrepreneurs involved with mining
coalesced into political groups that opposed the creation of a ruling landowning
government of the Australian Federation. Two key issues on the political agenda
were the level of protectionism and immigration policy. The government
successfully passed the Immigration Restriction Act of 1901, which formed the
basis for the White Australia Policy. However, the government had to reach a
compromise with the Free Trade Party to set import tariffs in 1902.
Australian immigration policies have been substantially different from those of
Argentina. As mentioned before, the Argentine elite chose to promote immigration.
Argentina’s population went from 1.35 million in 1861 to 11.28 million in 1928,
while, in Australia, it went from 1.2 to 6.22 million. In Argentina, this decreased
wages and increased the return on land. Indeed, Taylor (1997) calibrates a general
equilibrium model to estimate the impact on wages of the massive ﬂow of
immigration to Argentina up to the First World War. His calibration suggests that
the ﬂow of immigration reduced real wages in Argentina by approximately 20%
from what wage levels would have been if immigration had not taken place.
What is more, and in spite of similar factor endowments, land was more
concentrated in Argentina than in Australia, where family-operated, medium-sized
farms were relatively more common. As a consequence, landowners in Australia did
not constitute an oligarchy as they did in Argentina; they were a broad social group
and were not a ruling class. Landlords in Australia never controlled the
governmental machinery as they did in Argentina (see Hirst 1979).
To sum up, by the beginning of the twentieth century, the Australian labor
movement was already mature and consolidated, had an active role in the
policymaking process and had successfully demanded protection and restrictions on
the ﬂow of immigrants. However, it was not a hegemonic party; it had to make
compromises with the Free Trade Party, which represented the interests of the
agricultural sector. In Argentina, the ruling elite had vested interests in the
agricultural sector and did not need to compromise with antagonistic interest
groups. Even before the 1930s crisis, Australia was already experiencing a
distributional conﬂict similar to the one described in our model, and it found
institutional ways to deal with it. In practice, Australia had a democratic
government, while Argentina had an autocratic government ruled by the oligarchic
landlord class.
Australia’s stronger institutions also translated into better policymaking. In 1921,
the Australian government moved to protect the industries that had expanded during
the war; however, recognizing that vested interest groups would attempt to inﬂuence
the policymaking process, it established the Tariff Board, an advisory body
composed of ‘‘disinterested experts’’ to provide technical advice to both the
Parliament and the Minister for Trade and Customs. This development had two
direct beneﬁts that would facilitate the process of liberalization. First, as noted, it
reduced the direct inﬂuence of interest groups. Second, it created a bureaucracy with
technical expertise on the matter.
The Australian factor endowment also helped to reduce the intensity of the
distributional conﬂict. While Argentine exports were mainly agricultural goods, an
trade policies were more harmful to Argentine workers.
5.1.2 Liberalization
By the late 1960s, there was consensus among Australian economists on the beneﬁts
of import liberalization. These views came to be adopted ﬁrst by the members of the
Tariff Board and then by politicians. However, public opinion continued to show
support for protectionism. Interestingly, the ﬁrst move toward liberalization was in
1973 under a government led by the Labor Party, whose constituents tended to be
stronger supporters of protection. From then on, Australia embarked on a gradual
but steady path toward free trade. This process was facilitated by favorable external
and internal conditions that reduced the intensity of the distributional conﬂict and by
properly functioning institutions that made intertemporal bargaining possible.
The rise of Eastern Asia as a potential trading partner that was interested not only
in Australian raw materials but also manufactures shifted the Labor Party’s views on
protectionism. Closer integration into the regional economy through trade
liberalization would increase the demand for exports of manufactures that were
´
more labor-intensive than traditional exports (see Dıaz-Alejandro 1984; Gerchunoff
and Fajelbaum 2006).
Not only Labor Party leaders, but also the Australian Council of Trade Unions
(labor) and the Business Council (mining and service industries) advocated free
trade. Recognizing the effects of protection on export performance, both farming
and mining groups joined the public debate. At a federal level, the exporting states
also supported liberalization. The textiles, clothing and footwear, and automobile
industries, which enjoyed ample protection, invested heavily in political activity
aimed at maintaining protectionism. However, these industries were already
declining by the mid-1970s and they were further weakened by successive tariff
reductions from then on (see Garnaut 2002).
These external and internal developments changed the nature of the distributional
conﬂict associated with trade policy. Only capitalists and workers employed in
import-competing activities would oppose liberalization in the short run. However,
as part of a gradual, steady and predictable process of liberalization, new capital
investments were redirected toward activities that were not dependent on protection,
while, at the same time, vested interests were not harmed. The role played by the
institutions and the political leadership that took part in this task is remarkable. The
political system was able to set long-term policy goals to guide economic activity
without imposing large adjustment costs in terms of output or employment.
In contrast, during the early 1970s, Argentina was immersed in what was
tantamount to a civil war in which leftist groups were trying to create a socialist
country that would expropriate the holdings of the oligarchic landlords and transfer
the land to poor rural workers. Even when the economy was opened to trade during
the second part of the 1970s, this was not done by consensus. Instead, it was the
result of a unilateral decision made by a military government aligned with landlords
and the capitalists that could survive integration with the world economy and that
during the 1990s, after a devastating episode of hyperinﬂation, by a government that
campaigned on a populist agenda. Both these attempts were abrupt and were
conducted as shock policies by political groups that had political power but did not
represent a consensus view on the part of the population. Thus, trade reform was
abrupt and did not provide any way to smooth out losses. Even today, when serious
attempts to restrict trade are being made by the current government, a large segment
of the population sees the two episodes of trade liberalization as disastrous.
To sum up, the distributional conﬂict in Australia was mitigated both by a
differential initial factor endowment that led to the appearance of different
organizations and institutions in society and, later, by the rise of East Asia as a
trading partner. Moreover, Australian institutions were well suited to pursue a
gradual process of adjustment to minimize the losses of those who had sunk
investments in protected industries, while Argentine institutions and organizations
did not display those capabilities. In a context of policy path dependence, all these
differences ended up making a substantial difference in the outcomes.

6 Concluding remarks
Up to the 1930s, Argentina was well integrated into the world economy and, though
some protectionism naturally developed after the Great Depression of the 1930s, it
was only after the Second World War that the country closed itself off from world
markets. It then remained in a situation close to autarky until the mid-1970s. It was
only after a long period of absolute economic decline and a devastating bout of
hyperinﬂation that a comprehensive program of reform and integration into the
world economy was adopted.
We use a model with two tradable goods and one non-tradable good. We assume
that Argentina has a comparative advantage in the production of agricultural goods.
Thus, it might or might not produce manufactured goods. It also produces services.
We assume that the agricultural good is produced in the primary sector using land
and capital, while the manufactured good is produced in the secondary sector using
labor and capital. Services are produced using labor only. We also assume that
capital moves between the primary and secondary sectors more slowly than labor
moves between the secondary and tertiary sectors. This gives rise to three different
time horizons: the short run (no factor reallocation), the medium run (only labor
adjusts) and the long run (full reallocation).
We show that import-substitution policies exhibit path dependence. Indeed, this
is a very important insight in understanding the economic history of Argentina. We
also use our model to characterize the demands for protectionist policies of the
different groups in the economy. In the short run, landowners, capitalists who have
invested in the primary sector and workers employed in the tertiary sector support
free trade policies. On the other hand, capitalists and workers in the secondary
sector support protectionist policies. In the medium run, workers behave as a group
run, workers will support free trade if the terms of trade are favorable enough.
Using the insights derived from our model, we then argue that much of the
distributional conﬂict that arose was among owners of different production inputs
and that trade policies were widely used to shift income across groups. At the
beginning of the century, factor allocation resembled what we call ‘‘specialization
and trade.’’ During the inter-war period, trade opportunities and the terms of trade
worsened, which led to an incipient industrialization process. Argentina started the
second half of the century with a very different economic conﬁguration, as
industrialization had come a long way in terms of what we refer to as diversiﬁcation
and trade. These new economic conditions also changed the political equilibrium.
Urban workers employed in the manufacturing sector and industrialists were now
major social actors who demanded that the industrialization process be deepened,
which hurt trade and took the economy close to autarky. The years that followed the
Second World War witnessed an extraordinary expansion of trade in which
Argentina was not an active participant. We contend that one important reason
behind this outcome was the set of protectionist policies that were enacted in the
years following that war and that the main supporters of these policies were the new
political forces that emerged from the industrialization process in the inter-war
period.
The second half of the century was characterized by a strong distributional
conﬂict centered on trade policy. Traditional sectors composed of owners of factors
employed in the primary sector supported free trade policies, whereas the newer
political forces supported protectionism and import substitution. Argentina
embarked on an ambitious process of import substitution that aimed at achieving
self-sufﬁciency, especially in activities deemed strategic, such as oil and steel. As
domestically produced goods were substituted for labor-intensive imported
manufactures, the industrial sector grew and drew inputs from other sectors. The
substitution of capital-intensive activities was more problematic. Some of these
activities were not proﬁtable even though they had a captive internal market. With
little regard for economic rationality, the government took an active role in
developing these activities through public enterprises that became a chronic source
of deﬁcits.
Instead of delivering a steady path of inward-oriented growth, the importsubstitution strategy resulted in bumpy cycles of economic expansion followed by
sharp recession. Liberalization promised a return to export-led growth; however, in
the case of agents with vested interests in protected activities, it would cost them
dearly. The protectionist coalition, industrial capitalists and unionized workers, had
enough political power to keep liberalization off the policy agenda.
The accomplishment of gradual liberalization process that mitigated the losses of
those with vested interests and the deﬁnition of clear and sound long-term policy
goals required a set of political institutions capable of enforcing intertemporal
agreements between political groups. Sadly, Argentina lacked such institutions.
Instead, the dismantlement of the import-substitution strategy came only after the
protectionist coalition had become sufﬁciently weakened. The steps taken toward
population. Moreover, it did not provide any way to smooth out the losses. As a
result, Argentina’s integration into world markets was extremely costly in terms of
inequality and poverty.
Argentina had to wait to reap the beneﬁts of liberalization until the ﬁrst decade of
the twenty-ﬁrst century, when favorable commodity prices in world markets fueled
rapid economic growth. As the primary sector gained in productivity and received
large capital inﬂows and as employment in the tertiary sector soared, the demand for
protectionism was reduced. However, the distributional conﬂict centered on trade
policy survived the turn of the century and remains important.
Acknowledgements We are grateful for the comments provided by editors Rafael Di Tella and Edward
Glaeser, the three anonymous referees, Hugo Hopenhayn, Douglass North, Jeffrey Williamson, and
seminar participants at Harvard (March 2009) and LACEA (October 2009) in Buenos Aires. We have
also beneﬁted greatly from conversations with D. Heymann and would like to thank Ivan Torre for his
excellent research assistance.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

Appendix 1
In this appendix, we solve the long-run equilibrium of the model presented in
Sect. 3. We also derive the effect of export taxes on real factor remuneration in the
short, medium and long terms.
The long-run equilibrium
Let Ç denote the degree of comparative advantage of the secondary sector and p
denote the international price of the agricultural good relative to the manufacturing
good, i.e., the terms of trade:
Ç ¼

M L1Àb K bÀa
;
A T 1Àa
p¼

pa
:
pm

k¼

Lm
;
L

j¼

Km
:
K

the share of units of capital employed in that sector. We seek to characterize the
steady-state ratios j and k as functions of the technological and preference
parameters, factor endowments and exogenous variables: terms of trade p and the ad
valorem tax rate on exports s.
Since land is used only in the primary sector, its outside opportunity cost is zero.
Given our technological assumptions, the marginal product of the ﬁrst inﬁnitesimal
unit of capital employed in the primary sector is inﬁnite; therefore j \ 1, i.e., the
primary sector always employs some capital.
The demand for capital in the primary sector solves the following ﬁrst-order
condition for proﬁt optimization of the representative ﬁrm in the sector:

1Àa
1
ra K
a
ð1Þ
pd ¼ a 1Àa ;
a
1Àj
K T A
where pd is the domestic price of the agricultural good and ra is the return to capital
a
in the primary sector. Similarly, the demand for land in the primary sector, given the
land rental rate, q, is given by:
ð1 À aÞð1 À jÞa pd ¼
a

qT
:
K a T 1Àa A

ð2Þ

If some capital is also employed in the secondary sector, then the demand for
capital in the secondary sector satisﬁes:
 1Àb
k
rm K
b
ð3Þ
Ç pd ¼ a 1Àa ;
m
j
K T A
where pd is the domestic price of the manufactured good and rm is the return to
m
capital in the secondary sector. The demand for labor in the sector is given by:
jb
Lw
ð1 À bÞ
ð4Þ
Ç pd ¼ a 1Àa ;
m
k
K T A
where w is the wage rate.
The Cobb–Douglas utility function that we use to represent the preferences of
consumers implies that the share of each good in total expenditure is constant. Let
/a, /m be the shares of the agricultural and manufactured goods, respectively.
Naturally, 1 - /a - /m is the share of the service good. The aggregate demand for
each good (ca, cm and cs) satisﬁes the following maximizing condition:
c m pd
c a pd
ð1 À kÞLw
m
a
¼
¼
;
1 À /a À /m
/m
/a

ð5Þ

where we have already imposed the market equilibrium condition in the non-tradable sector:
cs ¼ ð1 À kÞLw:

each period. Therefore,
jb k1Àb Ç þ pð1 À jÞa ¼

cm þ pca
K a T 1Àa A

ð7Þ

If the country is trading internationally, the domestic price of the agricultural
good is pd ¼ ð1 À sÞpa . Due to the Lerner symmetry theorem, we assume that the
a
import tax is zero. Therefore, we have pd ¼ pm .
m
The following subsections solve the different types of steady-state equilibria that
might exist. First, we study the autarky equilibrium. We derive the shares kaut and
jaut and the autarky relative domestic price paut. This price has to be such that
p(1 - s) B paut B p: it is not proﬁtable to export or import goods. Second, we
study the equilibrium under specialization in the production of primary goods. We
derive the input prices w and r and then obtain the marginal cost of producing the
manufactured good. This marginal cost has to be higher than the international price
of the manufactured good. Third, we study the equilibrium under diversiﬁcation and
trade. We derive the shares k and j and the exports of primary goods. All of these
three variables have to be positive in equilibrium. Finally, we derive the equilibrium
under reversal of the pattern of trade. We proceed in the same way as in the case of
diversiﬁcation and trade, but now we set s = 0 and we require the exports of the
manufactured good to be positive.
Autarky equilibrium
We now solve the model for autarky by imposing that the consumed quantities equal
the produced quantities for each of the three goods:
cm
¼ jb k1Àb Ç ;
K a T 1Àa A
ð8Þ
ca
¼ ð1 À jÞa :
K a T 1Àa A
Using 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 8, we derive the following values for kaut, jaut and the
autarky relative domestic price paut:
/m b
;
/m b þ /a a
/m ð1 À bÞ
;
¼
/m ð1 À bÞ þ ð1 À /a À /m Þ

1Àb
bb
ð1 À bÞ
aÀb 1Àa
¼ a ð/m b þ /a aÞ /a
Ç:
a
ðð1 À /a À b/m ÞÞ

jaut ¼
kaut
paut

ð9Þ

For autarky to be a steady-state equilibrium, paut has to satisfy
pð1 À sÞ

paut

p:

A specialized economy imports the secondary good and produces and exports the
agricultural good. The economy is specialized in the primary sector if there is no
capital or labor employed in the secondary sector; therefore: j = k = 0. For this to
be an equilibrium, the wages and capital rental rate paid in the other sectors of the
economy must be greater than what can be proﬁtably paid by the secondary sector.
"
!
! #
1Àb b
b 1Àb b 1Àb À1
mcm ¼
þ
ð10Þ
r w M ! pd :
m
b
1Àb
Using 1, 5, 7 and 10, setting k = j = 0, pd ¼ pm and pd ¼ ð1 À sÞpa , we obtain
m
a
that specialization is an equilibrium if
"
!
! #
!
1Àb b
b 1Àb b ð1 À /a À /m Þ 1Àb
þ
ð1 À sÞp:
a
Ç
b
1Àb
ð/m ð1 À sÞ þ /a Þ
Otherwise, there will be diversiﬁcation. Naturally, ceteris paribus, for favorable
enough terms of trade, the economy will specialize in the production of primary
goods.
Diversiﬁcation and trade
Using 1,2, 4,5, 7 and imposing pd ¼ pm and pd ¼ ð1 À sÞpa , we solve for the
m
a
endogenous variables j and k.
From the conditions 1 and 2, we obtain k as an increasing function of j:
1
" 
#1Àb
1Àa
a
1
p
k¼
ð 1 À sÞ
j:
b 1Àj
Ç
From 4, 5 and 7 we deduce:
 p 1Àb ð1 À jÞ1Àb a
k
þ
ð 1 À sÞ
ð 1 À kÞ
Ç
ð 1 À kÞ b
b

aÀb

b
!1Àb

¼

/a
/m þ ð1ÀsÞ

1 À /a À /m

ð1 À bÞ:

ð11Þ

If b [ a, then the left-hand side of the former expression is increasing in j,
whereas the right-hand side is constant. Thus, there is at most one value of j that
satisﬁes this expression; k*and j* denote the shares that satisfy Eq. 11.
Proposition 1 In the diversiﬁcation and trade equilibrium, an improvement in the
terms of trade or a reduction in the export tax will lead to lower values of k* and j*.
The solution is a steady-state equilibrium if the country exports the primary good
and, at the same time, produces a positive amount of the manufactured good. The
conditions for diversiﬁcation were explained in Sect. 7.1.2.
a T 1Àa A
K

ð1 À jÞa :

In terms of the exogenous variables, this condition becomes:
 
/a ð1 À bÞ
Ç
ð 1 À jÃ Þ a k Ã b
:
ð1 À /a À /m Þð1 À sÞ p
ð1 À kÃ Þ jÃ
Reversal of the pattern of trade
Using the same approach as in Sect. 7.1.3 but setting s = 0, we solve for the
endogenous variables. In this case, the solution is a steady-state equilibrium if the
exports of the manufacturing good are positive, i.e., if ca(KaT1-aA)-1 [ (1 - j)a.
In terms of the exogenous variables, this condition becomes:
 
/a ð1 À bÞ Ç
ð1 À jÃ Þa kÃ b
[
:
ð1 À /a À /m Þ p
ð 1 À kÃ Þ j Ã
Graphical representation
Given a set of parameters Ç , /a, /m, a and b with b [ a ,0 \ /a, 0 \ /m and
/m ? /a \ 1, we can map each pair (p, s) to one of the steady states above.
Assuming b [ a, Fig. 1 in Sect. 3.1 shows the different regions in the (p, s) space.
The frontier between the reversal of trade and autarky regions is given by the
autarky price equation:

1Àb
bb
ð1 À bÞ
paut ¼ a ð/m b þ /a aÞaÀb /1Àa
Ç:
a
a
ðð1 À /a À b/m ÞÞ
The autarky region and the diversiﬁcation and trade region are delimited by the
level of s that makes exports equal to zero:
paut
s¼1À
:
p
The specialization and diversiﬁcation regions are separated by the points at
which the marginal ﬁrm is indifferent to producing the ﬁrst unit of the manufactured
good or not:
h
i1Àb
ð/m ð1ÀsÞþ/a Þ
Ç
ð1À/a À/m Þ
1
:
p ¼ h ib h i1Àb !
ð 1 À sÞ
1Àb
b
þ 1Àb
ab
The tax rate s affects the prices and resource allocation of the economy. As we show
below, the real remuneration of some factors of production increases with s, while
the real remuneration of other factors decreases. Therefore, unless all economic
agents are equally endowed, changes in the level of protectionism could have major
distributional consequences. In this section, we derive the preferences of the
different economic groups with regard to the policy variable s under the main
assumption that each economic agent has only one source of income. In our
analysis, we consider three time horizons: the short, medium and long terms. In the
short run, no reallocation of factors takes place. In the medium run, only labor is
allowed to move between the secondary and the tertiary sector. In the long run, all
mobile factors can be reallocated and the economy can fully adjust to its new
equilibrium. Although we may assume that inputs are ﬁxed within a sector, they are
mobile across different ﬁrms within that sector. Thus, competition among different
ﬁrms within a sector drives input prices to equalize the value of their marginal
product.
While we do not set up a formal model of political competition that determines
the evolution of the policy variable s, we do stress the political tensions that this
model generates. We use these results to articulate our discussion on the rise and fall
of protectionism in Argentina and the underlying distributional conﬂict.
Under autarky, or when the patterns of trade are such that the country exports
manufactured goods, the tax on exports of primary goods has no effect whatsoever.
We might think that the government could also tax the exports of manufactured
goods. However, we do not delve into those issues simply because we do not think
that they will shed any light on the main topic of this paper. So, we assume that the
economy is always in one of the two other possible scenarios in which s matters:
either close to a steady state in which the economy specializes in the production of
primary goods, or close to a steady state in which there is diversiﬁcation of
production and the country exports primary goods.
The demand for protectionism
In this section, we derive the effects of protectionism and changes in the terms of
trade on the real remunerations of the factors of production. We log-linearize the
model to derive the effect of protectionism in the short and medium run. The loglinearization is around an initial allocation. This initial allocation might be a steadystate equilibrium, in which case it is determined by p and s; however, the argument
follows through for any initial allocation determined also by j and k.
The zero proﬁt condition in the primary sector implies:
aa ¼ ð1 À aÞt þ aka ;
where aa ¼ dpd =pd is the percentage variation in the domestic price of the agria
a
cultural good, t = dq/q denotes the percentage variation in the rent of the land and
useful to employ different notations for the capital invested in the primary and
secondary sectors. Finally, a is the share of capital in the total cost of production in
the primary sector. Homotheticity of the production function implies that a is a
function only of input prices. Moreover, under the assumption of a Cobb–Douglas
technology, a is invariant. Similarly, in the manufacturing sector, we have:
mm ¼ lm ð1 À bÞ þ km b;
where mm ¼ dpd =pd is the percentage variation in the domestic price of the
m
m
manufactured good, lm = dwm/wm denotes the percentage variation in wages and
km = drm/rm is the percentage variation in the return to capital in the secondary
sector. As before, b is the share of capital in the total cost of production. We
continue to assume that b C a; that is, we assume that capital is used more intensively in the secondary sector. Though this last assumption is not crucial, it will help
us to solve some ambiguities later on. Finally, for the service sector, we have:
n ¼ ln ;
where n and ln = dwn/wn are the respective percentage variations in the prices of the
service good and the wages paid in that sector.
Cobb–Douglas preferences ensure that the percentage increase in expenditures of
the three goods are the same: aa ? ca = mm ? cm = cn ? n, where ci denotes the
percentage variation in the consumption of good i. For any agent, the indirect utility
function is given by:
ln w À

3
X

/i ln pd ;
i

i¼1

where w denotes the income of the individual. Notice that we can construct an exact
‘‘price index’’ to account for the effect of price changes in total utility. We use this
price index to deﬂate all the nominal variables of the economy.
p ¼ ac /a þ mc /m þ nn ð1 À /a À /m Þ:
In our model, the government changes domestic relative prices by taxing trade.
The domestic price of the agricultural good is then given by pd ¼ pa ð1 À sÞ.Taking
a
logs and denoting ta = dsa/(1 - sa), we obtain:
aa ¼ ai À ta :
For the manufactured good, its domestic price is given by mm = mi. The
economy budget constraint is: pmYm ? paYa = pmCm ? paCa. Log-linearizing this
equation around the initial values, we have:
ðmi þ ym Þð1 À va Þ þ ðai þ ya Þva ¼ ðcm þ mi Þð1 À ca Þ þ ðai þ ca Þca ;
where yi = dYi/Yi and ca is the share of the agricultural good in total expenditure on
tradable goods at international prices. If the country exports the primary good, then
v a [ c a.
The variable ca can be re-written in terms of parameters of the model:
pa Ca
pm Cm þ pa Ca
/a
¼
:
ð1 À sÞ/m þ /a

ca ¼

Similarly, for va,
va ¼

1
1þ

k1Àb jb
pð1ÀjÞa

:
Ç

We now consider the adjustment of the economy to changes in international
prices and taxes, assuming different speeds of adjustment for the mobile factors of
production.
Short run In the short run, all factors of production are reallocated only within the
sector where they were previously employed. Given the Cobb–Douglas production
function and the zero proﬁt condition, we know that the ﬂow of earnings accruing to
landlords is equal to a fraction of the value of the total production of the primary
sector. Given that land is not reallocated, the percentage increase in the rental rate
for land is equal to:
t ¼ aa þ y a :
Since, in the short run, the allocation of capital in the primary sector does not
change, the following capital rent equation holds:
k a ¼ aa þ y a :
Similarly, in the manufacturing sector, the following capital rent and wage
equations hold:
km ¼ mm þ ym ;
lm ¼ mm þ ym :
Finally, total expenditure on services has to equal the total wages paid in the
sector. Noting that the production of services has to equal consumption, we ﬁnd
that:
ln ¼ cn þ nn :
Let us now consider the effects of an increase in the international price of the
primary good. Given that there is no factor reallocation, the output of the three
in proportion to the increase in the terms of trade. Since the agents owning those
resources are wealthier, they increase their demand for services, which drives up
wages in the tertiary sector. Workers in the service sector enjoy an increase in their
nominal wages that is proportional to the economy’s degree of specialization: va.
Finally, the factors employed in the manufacturing sector do not receive any
increase in their remunerations. The consumer price index rises, since the prices of
both the primary and the tertiary goods increase. Proposition 2 summarizes these
results.
Proposition 2 In the short run, an increase in the international price of the
agricultural good (i.e., an improvement in the terms of trade) raises the real
remuneration received by landowners, capitalists in the primary sector and service
workers. However, it reduces the real remuneration of workers and capitalists in the
manufacturing sector.
Notice that the real effects of an increase in the international price of the
agricultural good are identical to those of a decrease in the international price of the
manufactured good. Agents may demand policies that will protect them from
changes in international prices. Proposition 3 deals with the effects of taxes on
exports.
Proposition 3 In the short run, protectionist policies reduce the real remuneration
of landowners, capitalists in the primary sector and service workers. If /a [ 0,
protectionist policies will raise the real remuneration of workers and capitalists in
the secondary sector.

Medium run In the medium run, labor is allowed to move across industries, so
wages equalize across sectors. Log-linearizing the market clearing condition for
labor, we have:
kðmm þ ym Þ þ ð1 À kÞðnn þ yn Þ ¼ l:
This equation and the condition that lm = ln = l replace the two equations of
wage determination obtained for the case of the short-run equilibrium. Now, the
short-run effects of an improvement in the terms of trade include an increase in the
production of services and a decrease in the total production of manufactures. Since
there is no factor adjustment in the primary sector, the remuneration of capital and
land increase by the same proportion as the terms of trade. This generates an upward
shift in the demand for services which is met both by an increase in its equilibrium
price and by a displacement of labor from the secondary to the tertiary sector. The
manufacturing sector uses less labor, and the return to capital in this sector therefore
falls. Overall, consumption of the primary good decreases, and consumption of the
manufactured and service goods increases.
Proposition 4 In the medium run, an improvement in the terms of trade increases
if:
va ð1 À kÞ [

/a
:
ð/m b þ aa Þ

Higher demand for services increases wages in that sector and attracts workers
from the manufacturing sector, raising wages across the economy. However, the
equilibrium increase in wages may fall short of compensating the negative welfare
effect of the increase in the price of the agricultural good. The more specialized the
economy in the primary and tertiary sector (i.e., a higher va and a lower k), the more
likely is it that real wages will increase in the medium run. This is because, in such
cases, the upward shift in demand for labor in the service sector is stronger. Thus,
notice that, if the economy is already industrialized, an increase in the terms of trade
may harm workers even in the medium run.
Proposition 5 In the medium run, protectionist policies reduce the real remuneration of landowners and capitalists in the primary sector. If /a [ 0, protectionist
policies increase the real remuneration of capitalists in the manufacturing sector. If
/a [ 0, workers’ welfare increases if and only if:
!
/a þ /m
ð1 À kÞ ð1 À bÞva þ b
1:
/a þ ð1 À sÞ/m

Workers’ welfare increases with protectionism if the economy is beyond a given
level of industrialization. In this case, workers may ally with capitalists in the
secondary sector to demand protectionist policies. If s = 0, this condition is
satisﬁed as soon as the economy starts producing in the secondary sector. A higher
tax rate implies that the condition will be met for higher k and lower va. In Fig. 3,
we ﬁnd the pairs (p, s), such that workers are indifferent to whether there is more or
less protection, since movement in either direction will improve workers’ welfare in
the medium run.
Moreover, we expect that, the more industrialized the economy is, the larger the
share of workers who will be employed in the secondary sector and, hence, by virtue
of Proposition 2, the larger the share of workers who will also beneﬁt from
protectionist policies in the short run.
Long run In the long run, the economy will tend toward a new steady state.
Therefore, it is useful to analyze the effects of protectionism based on the results
obtained in Sect. 7.1.
A full analysis of the long-run solution for this economy is fairly complicated.
Nevertheless, the two propositions set out below sufﬁce for our purposes in this
paper. We focus only on the preferences for protectionism of landlords and workers,
since we assume that capitalists are concerned only with policies in the short and
trade regions (i.e., it exports the primary good). Otherwise, changes in the export tax
rate would not have any effect.
Proposition 6 In the long run, landlords beneﬁt from an improvement in the terms
of trade and from a reduction in export taxes.
Proposition 7 If the economy is specialized, then, in the long run, workers beneﬁt
from an improvement in the terms of trade and from a reduction in export taxes.
There is always a p* high enough so that workers are better off at s = 0.
Constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) preferences and technology
in Autarky
In this appendix, we derive a log-linearization around the autarky equilibrium for a
CES economy. The results of this section are referred to in Sect. 3.4.
The production functions of the agricultural and manufactured goods are,
respectively:
À
q Á1=q1
A nT T q1 þ nK;a KA1
;
À q
q Á1=q2
M nL LM2 þ nK;m KM2
;
where A and M are productivity parameters, n0i s are share parameters and (1 - qi)-1
for i e {1, 2} are the elasticity of substitution. Notice that:
qi

Case

Elasticity of substitution
0

-?

Leontieff: perfect complements

0

Cobb–Douglas

1

1

Perfect substitutes

?

The production function for services is still YN = NLN, where N is a productivity
parameter.
Consumer’s preferences are represented by:
À
q
q
q Á1=qd
/1 cAd þ /2 cMd þ ð1 À /1 À /2 ÞcNd
:
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
We are interested in the effect of the exogenous variables (T; K; L; A; M; N,
^
^
^
where T ¼ dT=T) on the capital and labor employment share k and j. The
following table shows the sign of these effects as a function of the elasticity of
substitutions q1, q2 and qd. For instance, the ﬁrst row shows that the effect of an
^
^ ^
increase in the amount of land, T, on j (i.e., dj=dT) has the same sign as q1 - qd,
^ ^
whereas the effect on k (i.e., dk=dT) has the same sign as -(q2 - qd)(q1 - qd). The
dj
^
dT
^
dK

^
dk

q1 - qd

-(q2 - qd)(q1 - qd)

(footnote)

qd - q2

^
dL
^
dA

qd - q2

q2 - qd

- qd

(q2 - qd)qd

^
dM
^
dN

qd

qd

(q2 - qd)qd

- qd

(footnote table) The sign of the effect of the endowment of capital on the share of
capital employed in the manufacturing sector is the same as a quadratic function of
q1, q2 and qd that depends on parameters a, b and k.
^
^
In Sect. 3.4.1, we analyze the effect of L and A (population growth and
^
^
productivity growth in agriculture) on j and k.
^ L has the same sign as q2 - qd, i.e., population growth L will
^
We notice that dk=d
decrease k if the elasticity of substitution in consumption is greater than in the
production of manufactures (qd [ q2). We also state that the effect on j will be the
^ ^
opposite: dj=dL has the same sign as qd - q2.
^ ^
Similarly, in the table we read that dk=dA has the same sign as (q2 - qd)qd,
which corresponds with what was stated in Sect. 3.4.1: Higher productivity in the
agricultural sector will decrease k if the elasticity of substitution in consumption is
greater than 1 and than that in the production of manufactures (i.e., qd [ 0,
^ ^
qd [ q2). Similarly, dj=dA will have the same sign as -qd: the share of capital, j,
will decrease if the elasticity of substitution in consumption is greater than 1.

Appendix 2
In this appendix, we provide evidence supporting our argument that trade policies
are still a key component of electoral competition and that the coalitions vote as
suggested by our model. We look at the developments of 2008, when the
government’s attempt to increase export duties was met with a nationwide lockout
by farming associations and mass demonstrations in urban centers. We also use the
results of the 2007 presidential election and the 2009 legislative elections to
compare how the incumbent party—Frente para la Victoria (FPV), a political
coalition including the Justicialist Party—fared before and after it publicly
confronted the pro-agriculture coalition.
Export duties were almost non-existent during the 1990s, but were raised after
the devaluation in 2002 to capture windfall proﬁts from exporting ﬁrms. Over time,
they became a reliable source of revenue for the federal government and a handy
mechanism for keeping domestic food prices in check. For example, the tax rate on
oilseeds exports was raised from 0.5% in 2001 to 17.5% in 2002.
The FPV is an electoral alliance that was founded in 2003 within the Justicialist
´
election of 2005, the FPV secured a majority in both houses of Congress, and in the
presidential election of 2007, it obtained 45% of the vote—22% more than its
´
nearest rival. In 2007 the FPV candidate was Mrs. Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner,
the incumbent president’s wife.
Up to 2008, the FPV government had increased export duties substantially.
Export duties for oilseeds reached 32% during 2007. However, the government also
kept the local currency undervalued, which beneﬁtted exporting sectors.
In March 2008, the international price of oilseeds reached record levels. The
government attempted to introduce a new sliding-scale taxation system for soybean
and sunﬂower exports that would raise duties to 44% of the prices of that time. The
announcement was met by a nationwide lockout by farming ﬁrms. Government
ofﬁcials and government-afﬁliated labor unionists denounced the lockout as being
staged by big farming companies and having no popular support. However, the proagriculture movement drew support from a large share of the middle-class
population that gathered in urban centers to oppose the new tax scheme. After 4
months of political struggles that eroded the government’s approval ratings and
fractured the cohesion among FPV members of Congress, the proposal was defeated
in the Senate, despite the fact that the FPV had a majority in both houses of
Congress. The legislative elections of 2009 mirrored the major setback suffered by
the government the previous year. The FPV obtained 30% of the vote, 15% less than
in the previous election, and lost its majority in both houses.
During the events of 2008, the FPV took a clear stance in the distributional
conﬂict and appealed to the protectionist sentiment of its constituents. These
appeals, which had been so effective during the second half of the twentieth century,
resulted in a sharp reduction in approval ratings and votes.
Under the predictions of our model, agents with vested interests in the primary
sector would be less likely to vote for the FPV after the party revealed its position
concerning the distributional conﬂict. If agents voted according to their interests and
trade policy was an important component of electoral competition, we should
observe a sharper fall in FPV votes in districts where the majority of voters derive
their income from the primary or the tertiary sector. We test that prediction by
comparing the percentages of votes that the FPV received in 2007 and 2009 in
different districts, or Partidos, of the Province of Buenos Aires.
For each of the 134 districts of Buenos Aires, we obtain a measure of the ratio of
the population that should support free trade. Using 2001 census data, all individuals
that derive their income from activities in the primary sector and all other
individuals with some secondary schooling who are not employed in the
manufacturing sector are classiﬁed as ‘‘free traders’’. All individuals who derive
their income from the manufacturing sector and those individuals who do not have
at least some secondary schooling and are not employed in the primary sector are
classiﬁed as ‘‘protectionists’’.
In our model, we have abstracted from skill heterogeneity among workers.
However, if skilled workers are employed more intensively in the tertiary sector,
then we might expect them to support free trade. Similarly, if unskilled workers are
classiﬁcation captures such heterogeneity to some extent.
Suppose that, in district d, free traders and protectionists voted for FPV with
probabilities pd,f and pd,p, respectively. Then, if the proportion of free traders in
district d is fd, the total share of votes of FPV is: vd : pd,p ? (pd,f - pd,p)fd. This
identity holds for any classiﬁcation of free traders. Now, we model pd,f = p(bf, ed),
i.e., the probability pd,f is equal to a monotonic function of a parameter bf and a
disturbance ed that is common to pd,f and pd,p. If we assume that p(b, e) = b ? e
and that E(e|f) = 0, we can estimate bf and bp consistently by OLS, since
vd = bp ? (bf - bp)fd ? ed. The parameters bi can be interpreted as the expected
probability that an agent of type i votes for the FPV, where the expectation is taken
across districts. The estimation results are shown below:
2007 Presidential election

2009 Legislative election

Coef.

Coef.

SE

95% CI

SE

95% CI

Free traders

0.205

0.042

0.122

0.288

- 0.086

0.041

- 0.167

- 0.005

Protectionists

0.858

0.058

0.742

0.974

0.774

0.057

0.660

0.888

Notice that both protectionists and free traders were less likely to vote for the
FPV in 2009 than they were in 2007. However, the drop in the probability for free
traders is more pronounced. To test the null hypothesis of an identical drop for both
groups, we regress the difference in FPV votes between 2009 and 2007 on the share
of free traders. Notice that
À
Á À
Á
vd;09 À vd;07 ¼ bp;09 À bp;07 þ bf ;09 À bf ;07 À bp;09 þ bp;07 fd þ ed :
We ﬁnd some evidence against the hypothesis of an identical drop in
probabilities: p value 0.067.
The negative coefﬁcient for free traders in 2009 suggests that our linear
speciﬁcation of p(b, e) may be incorrect. Therefore, we try a different speciﬁcation:
p(b, r, e) = U(b ? re), where U is the cumulative density function of a standard
normal and r is a parameter to be estimated. If we assume that e is normally
distributed, we can estimate bf,bp and r by maximum likelihood. U(bi) can be
interpreted as the median probability that an agent of type i will vote for the FPV,
where the median is taken over the distribution of probabilities pd,i across districts.
The estimation results are shown below:
2007 Presidential election
Coef bi
Free traders

SE

2009 Legislative election
U(bi)

Coef bi

SE

U(bi)

- 1.030

0.142

0.152

- 2.567

0.336

0.005

Protectionists

1.437

0.288

0.925

0.385

0.051

0.650

Sigma

0.344

0.209

0.438

Moreover, it is still true that the probability of voting for the FPV drops more in the
case of free traders.
The estimated probabilities seem too extreme, i.e., our classiﬁcation seems to
imply a strong negative correlation between the proportion of ‘‘free traders’’ and
FPV votes by district. It may be the case that, irrespective of their classiﬁcation,
individuals in more agricultural districts are less likely to vote for the FPV,
independently of their source of income. In that case, fd and ed are negatively
correlated and our results would be unable to distinguish between individual and
district-level political attitudes. However, even if that is the case, the fact that the
aggregate source of income affects political attitudes at the district level is also
consistent with the predictions of our model: service workers will support policies
that increase the aggregate income of their district and boost the demand for their
services.
One might suspect that these differences in political attitudes are driven
exclusively by the heterogeneity in educational attainment across districts.
However, if we classify individuals solely on the basis of their educational
attainment, we obtain strikingly different results. The estimated probability for
unskilled individuals (no secondary education) falls drastically, while the probability for skilled workers remains almost constant. Unskilled individuals employed
in the primary sector were less likely to vote for the FPV in 2009, while skilled
individuals employed in the secondary sector partially compensated for the loss of
votes from skilled individuals employed in the tertiary sector.
2007 Presidential election

2009 Legislative election

Coef.

Coef.

SE

95% CI

SE

95% CI

Skilled

0.318

0.031

0.257

0.379

0.288

0.037

0.215

0.360

Unskilled

0.662

0.036

0.590

0.733

0.253

0.043

0.169

0.337

For comparison purposes, we present the maximum likelihood results for the
speciﬁcation: U(b ? re). Notice how similar the estimated probabilities are in the
two speciﬁcations.
2007 Presidential election
Coef bi
Skilled

SE

2009 Legislative election
U(bi)

Coef bi

SE

U(bi)

- 0.491

0.087

0.312

- 0.569

0.110

0.285

Unskilled

0.435

0.099

0.668

- 0.698

0.138

0.243

Sigma

0.207

0.073

0.262

0.062

This provides support for our claim that the source of income is a key
determinant of individuals’ political attitudes. In particular, individuals with vested
interests in the primary sector and skilled individuals in the tertiary sector support
suggests that individuals took into account the ideological and political stance of the
FPV with respect to protectionism. Those who opposed protectionism were less
likely to vote for the FPV in 2009 than in 2007.

Williamson J (2002) Winners and losers over two centuries of globalization. NBER working paper 9161,
