Introduction
Business sustainability and responsibility are two concepts that shape an extensive profile
of sustainable development, a context in which the implementation of strategies capable to
ensure a healthy growth and a consistent development for the company cannot be achieved
by ignoring their impact on the environment, society or the effectiveness of their activities.
In tourism industry, there is found a certain lack of experience in managing the constituents
of sustainability, associated with the incapacity of adopting an integrated vision of one’s
own business (Hobson and Essex, 2001).
In this article the authors have proposed that through an exploratory approach to emphasize
the way in which the implementation of the sustainable development principles are
correlated with the aspects of organic growth in tourism and to what extent it is possible to
evaluate the organic growth from the perspective of sustainable development principles.
For this, it was conducted a qualitative research in Brasov county, the choice for the area is
recommended by the high touristic potential, the touristic image and tradition. For the
research it was used the method of semi-structured interview, based on a sample obtained
by quotas while the sampling was guided.
Sustainable development and organic growth have been approached as two distinct themes,
and through the processing of obtained information have resulted correlations and
associations, on one hand, and essential aspects about variables that define the strategic
pillars of organic growth in tourism, on the other hand. By combining the elements of each
theme, there have been identified the main evaluation methods of organic growth from the
perspective of sustainable development.
1. Literature review
The relationship between tourism and sustainability has always existed (Torres-Delgado
and López Palomeque, 2014), but until the 80s the consequences of this relationship were
not analyzed in a rigorous way to find the impact of these two components simultaneously
(Smith, 1977; Young, 1973 cited in Buckley, 2012; Turner and Ash, 1975). Researchers
have begun to show interest in sustainable tourism issues only in the last 20 years (May,
1991; Nash and Butler, 1990).
The consequence of the principles and provisions of the two key documents relating
directly to Sustainable Development (Rio Declaration and Agenda 21) was that national
economies (particularly the developed ones), international organizations (United Nations
and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) and companies, nonprofit organizations, governments and civil society have become increasingly preoccupied
to take concrete steps to integrate sustainability dimensions in their activity.
The sustainable character of tourism covers many aspects: the responsible use of natural
resources, considering the environmental impact of activities (waste generation, pressure on
water, land and biodiversity, etc.), the use of 'clean' energy, heritage protection and
preservation of natural and cultural integrity of destinations, quality and sustainability of
jobs, the positive impact on local economy or the tourist reception quality. These principles
are largely reflected in tourism strategies applied at national and regional level, even if they
have not materialized sufficiently in effective action (EUR-Lex, 2010).
social and environmental aspects (Buckley, 2012). Many tourist units only selectively apply
the practices of sustainable development, namely those which could be an advantage in
terms of profitability or image advantages (Lane, 2009; Sheldon and Park, 2011). The
scholars partially agree to these actions, claiming that sustainability in tourism, as in other
sectors, is difficult to obtain (Casagrande and Rinaldi, 2002).
According to the vision presented in the "White Paper of Business Sustainability" (July
2014) drafted under the auspices of the World Economic Forum, it is admitted that
businessmen/investors begin to admit that "the financial success and the survival of the
company depend on their contribution to development of a clean environment and of
human rights inside the societies they operate".
Development and growth were, are and will be a constant concern in the business
environment. Growth climate in the 21st century is also changing, because of the constraint
of the limited resources that contribute to the costs’ growth, but also because of public and
social responsibilities that a company has today. Achieving organic growth based on solid
principles of sustainable development, companies can improve their image and thus they
increase their chances of success. To achieve this goal, it is necessary for companies to
understand and assimilate the concepts of “organic growth” and “sustainable development”.
Many companies choose the organic growth because it is less expensive and requires less
cultural adjustment than other forms of growth (Berg, 2011). Organic growth involves
exploiting a company's internal resources in order to increase turnover and profit. Using the
organic growth model, companies focus on innovation, namely on the creation of new
tangible products and services, the identification of new opportunities in the current market
and the sales increasing for existing products (Atkinson, 2007).
The concept of "Smart Growth" (Hess, 2010) replaces the phrase "grow or disappear" with
the expression “improve in order to stay competitive”. The main objective of smart growth
is building a strategy based on genuine growth that creates value for customers, higher
productivity and proper management of risks caused by this growth.
From a conceptual perspective, the basic principles of organic growth are (Hess, 2010): (1) a
simple growth model that can be understood by any employee, (2) efficient organization at
each company level, (3) a continuous and transparent measurement of financial, operational
and behavioral performance (4) involved and dedicated workforce to achieve high
productivity, (5) leaders involved at all levels of operation, (6) the last generation technology.
According to practitioners (Burwell et al., 2013), the essential elements on which a
company’s organic growth is based on, are: (1) people, culture and processes, (2)
commercial excellence, (3) innovation, (4) (fuel for growth), (5) growth strategy, (6) the
definition of winning and the goals.
Combining the two perspectives, it results a new integrative perspective selecting five
representative principles for organic growth (Ivasciuc, 2014): the creation of a growth
philosophy inside the tourism company (1), customer orientation (2), organization
performance measurement (3), the efficiency of company processes (4), human capital and
organizational culture (5).
Organic growth is a valuable strategic option for the company because it involves
strengthening its position using its own energy and resources. Although considered a
strategic alternative slower than others (acquisitions, mergers, etc.), it has lower costs,
which makes it attractive for tourism business owners and managers.
According to the literature (Kotler et al., 2010), the evolution of marketing achieved its
third level – the value-oriented level. Called Marketing 3.0, it follows naturally Marketing
1.0 which was product-oriented and Marketing 2.0 which was consumer oriented. This
issue has been reported previously in a context of analysis of the relationship between
marketing and sustainable development (Gabriel, 2003), considering that there is an
enterprise legitimacy crisis and that the marketing role is not only to create wealth, but also
to create value for the citizen-consumer by and for the citizen-company.
As long as the other two forms of marketing maintain their relevance, Marketing 3.0
integrates very well the essential elements, respectively a company need of growth, through
value creation and respecting thek sustainable development principles. This level of
marketing focuses on the company’s values, mission and vision, because the new
consumers appreciate cooperation relationships, the so-called “horizontal relationships”
(Kotler et.al, 2010), relations of cooperation between the community members.
A conclusive expression of the symbiotic relationship between the sustainable development
principles and those of organic growth is the Values-Based Matrix – VBM, which brings
face-to-face the company and the individuals concerns. By combining these elements we
can obtain the customer satisfaction and the firm’s development at the same time.
2. Research methodology
In conducting this research we started from the assumption that there is a symbiotic
relationship between sustainable development and organic growth, as well as the running of
the tourism activity by respecting the sustainable development principles is the premise of
implementing the principles of the organic growth in tourism. Based on this hypothesis, the
research goal is to determine the extent in which the implementation of the sustainable
development’s principles is correlated with corresponding aspects of organic growth in
tourism and, also, to which extent it is possible the evaluation of the organic growth from
the perspective of sustainable development.
To achieve the proposed goal we conducted a qualitative marketing research among
managers in the cities of Brasov and Predeal. The two areas were chosen because of the
following considerations: the image achieved in time, high touristic potential of these areas
and their tradition in the hospitality industry. The analysis units are the hotels, because they
are complex touristic establishments, which can offer the necessary information to
accomplish the proposed study, considering their form of organization and the way they are
functioning.
To establish the sample, the hotels have been selected based on the following criteria:
number of stars, accommodation capacity, tourist area, the hotel's functioning period on the
market (at least one year). The sample was made up of 76 hotel units, out of which 49 were
4-5-star and 29 were 3-star hotels.

Number of stars
Touristic area
Brașov
Poiana Brașov
Predeal

Accommodation
capacity
Above 100 rooms
Below 100 rooms

1 hotel – 196 rooms
2 hotels – 81/71 rooms

1 hotel – 183 rooms
2 hotels – 42/43 rooms

Above 100 rooms

2 hotels – 212/186 rooms

-

Below 100 rooms
Above 100 rooms
Below 100 rooms

1 hotel – 87 rooms
1 hotel – 139 rooms
2 hotels – 75/70 rooms
9 hotels

1 hotel – 56 rooms
1 hotel – 135 rooms
1 hotel – 93 rooms
6 hotels

TOTAL

4-5 stars

3 stars

Being a non-probabilistic sample, the hotels were selected by guided sampling, using the
quota method, respectively 20% of each category. The hotels from the sampling were
chosen taking into consideration, simultaneously, the availability/approval of managers to
answer. The research is based on the in depth interview technique and the semi-structured
interviewing procedure. The Interview Guide included ten discussion topics, structured in
two main directions: compliance and application of sustainable development principles by
the accommodation unit (a) and the concern for the business organic growth (b). The
information was collected during the period January the 15 th, 2015 – February the 15th,
2015 by establishing meetings up to 45 minutes with the managers of the selected hotels,
who had accepted to participate in the research.
The collected information was individually processed, by analyzing the answers from each
interview, after which they were centralized according to the compatibility and
convergence with the aim of research.

3. Results and discussions
After processing the gained information there have been identified the main preoccupations
of managers regarding the application of sustainable development principles in the hotel
units.
The first theme of interest was relating tourism business to the context of sustainable
development. In seven out of 15 hotels, the managers have revealed that they respect the
principles of sustainable development, linking them to the growth objectives of their
business.
Even if declaratively there is a balanced attitude towards the three components of
sustainable development, the majority of hotel owners (12 out of 15) admit that, in reality,
they are mainly directed to the environmental component, showing deeper concerns for
saving resources. Only in 8 cases out of 15, the managers claimed that they make real
efforts to approach simultaneously all the three components (economic, environmental and
social). (Figure no. 1)

Figure no. 1: Relating tourism business to the principles of sustainable development
The social component of sustainable tourism aims, among others, to ensure the diversity
and social inclusion. In this regard, the research highlighted the hotel owners’
preoccupation to ensure equal employment opportunities for both genders and then to offer
the employees training modules, development programs and possibilities/opportunities for
internal promotion. Considering the fact that the employees are the most important resource
in services, all the managers from the sample believe that the investment in human resource
is essential for the development of a sustainable tourism business.
The managers didn’t give clear information about the manner and the extent of which
stakeholders (investors, clients and community members) are involved in supporting the
actions of sustainable development of the business.
Regarding the performances measurement, only six out of the 15 hotel owners use the
indicators for sustainable development performances evaluation and only 20% (3 out of 15)
undertake measurable objectives in this respect.
In conclusion, although they began to be interested in applying the principles of sustainable
development in tourism business, hotel managers do not have a strategy based on specific
and measurable objectives. They are aware that the three components of the sustainable
development are affecting their activity and the evolution of their business, but they do not
act in a uniform, coherent and balanced manner.
Based on the managers’ answers regarding the external factors that influence their business,
we grouped these factors on the three dimensions of sustainable development: social,
economic and environmental.
In Table no. 2 it can be seen how a part of the external factors have a favorable or unfavorable
influence on the tourism business and the increase of their influence determines business
fluctuations in a positive or negative manner. Considering that the factors such as the crime
rate of the area, the degree of poverty, competition, labor migration abroad and the degree of
pollution are more pronounced, the hospitality activity drops.
the possibility of grouping them in factors that generate correlation relationships because
they are measurable in terms of quantity – and factors that generate association relationship
– because they are measurable in terms of quality.
Table no. 2: External factors influence on the tourism business growth

Reverse
relationship

Not favorable

Direct
relationship

Favorable

External
factor
influence

Social dimension

Life expectancy
Education level
Security level
Labor force availability
The level of involvement of
Correlation
local community and
authorities in social actions
Cultural events offer
Leisure and entertainment
infrastructure
Cultural offer quality
Local traditions, customs and
values – anthropic resources
Association
Local community attitude
regarding tourists
Medical services quality

Correlation

Association

Unidentified

Ageing population
Crime level

Economic dimension
Living standard
Unemployment rate
Income level
Innovation level of the
touristic offer Tourists
expenses
Tourists seasonality
Labor force availability
Appearance rate for new
businesses in the industry

Environment
dimension
Natural resources
availability
Transport
infrastructure
Technological
innovation level
for tourism
equipment

Source of touristic demand
Telecommunication
Concerns on
infrastructure
environment
Labor force qualification
protection actions
in tourism industry
Poverty level
Number of competitors

Qualitative level of
competition
Labor force migration

Pollution level
Number of
environment
regulations
Types of pollution
in the area
Types of
environment
regulations

Within the second topic, that of organic or smart growth of the tourism business, the
managers have offered more specific information comparing to the first topic. The research
showed that there are medium and long term objectives and internal performance
indicators. Thus, based on the answers from Table no. 3, it was possible to group the
variables considered in elaborating a marketing strategy for organic growth at the tourism
unit level.
The grouping was realized according to the five pillars of the organic growth
 creating a philosophy of growth inside the organization (1),
 customer orientation (2),
 measurement of the organization’s performance (3),
 the efficiency of the processes inside the organization (4),
 human capital and organizational culture (5).
Table no. 3: Marketing strategy pillars for organic growth of tourism company
Creating a
philosophy
of growth inside
the organization
Accommodation
capacity

Customer
orientation

Rating TripAdvisor

Opening year
Rating
(the time being on
www.booking.com
the market)
The year of the
Number of likes on
last modernization Facebook
Tourists demand
source

Number of
complains/year

Type of tourists
by travel purpose

Rate of loyal
customers

Number of growth
Indefinite
goals/year

Measurement
of the
organization’s
performance

The efficiency
of the processes
inside
the organization
Implementation
of ISO standards
Turnover
(qualityenvironment)
Existence of
Occupation
written work
rate/year
procedures
inside the firm
Impact of paid
Number of
promotional
outsourced
actions
services
Number of
Number of new
online channels
touristic offers/year for business
promotion
Number of
additional
Indefinite
services/year
Resources
consumption
Indefinite
(energy, water etc.)

Human capital
and organizational
culture
Number of
employees
Women/men rate
of employment
Medium number
of years in the
organization
Employees
qualification
First 3 wished
characteristics
of employee
Manager’s work
time rate for
employee’s training

The variables defining the strategic pillars are, in the same time, instruments for measuring
organic growth of tourism business. They can lead to the creation of so-called control points
which can be considered evaluation instruments of sustainability. Their relevance and
accuracy are given by the fact that they show the hotel’s level of organic or smart growth.
In table no. 4, the variables are grouped based on two aspects: the sustainable development
principles and the need to evaluate the organic growth of the tourism business.

Table no. 4: Evaluation methods of organic growth
from sustainable development perspective
Organic growth variables

Organic growth evaluation instruments
Social dimension








934

Number of new customers (tourists)
Rating TripAdvisor
Rating www.booking.com
Number of likes on Facebook
Number of complains
Number of loyal customers

 Level of tourists satisfaction

Organic growth evaluation instruments

 Number of online appearances
 Number of communication channels
(online and offline)
 Number of collaborations with local
community and authorities

 the image of the company in the external
environment
 involvement in social actions by collaborating
with the community and the local authorities

Economic dimension
 Number of accommodation places
 Occupation rate
 Number of nights-stand
 Number of services
 Number of new services
 Number of employees
 Employee’s level of qualification
 Personnel structure by demographic
criteria

 Structure and dimensions of touristic offer

 Competences of human capital

 Collaborations with partners inside the
community
Environment dimension
 Ecological equipment
functioning period
Investments in new and ecological
equipment
Number of implemented standards of
 Environment politics implementation
quality
Number of owned environment
certifications
 Involvement in environment protection
Rate of savings (water, energy etc.)
actions
Quantity of recycled waste

 Number of contracts with partners







Conclusions
The conducted qualitative research highlighted the essential aspects from the relations
between sustainable development and organic growth, proposing, in the same time, a
general configuration of marketing strategy pillars of sustainable business in tourism.
From the strategic and operational marketing perspective, the qualitative research has
shown that a sustainable business development can be achieved through operational
excellence (focusing on the employees and the processes) and customer orientation, but
respecting the essential condition of social values and environmental protection in which
the business is conducted. From the same perspective, the research has shown that the
social dimension of sustainable tourism business has an impact, first, on the client
orientation and then on the organizational culture.
It has also been shown the fact that the economic dimension has impact especially on the
processes efficiency from the tourism company and on the customers and organizational
culture, and the environmental dimension has, also, impact on the processes efficiency and
on the organizational culture.
The principles related to the triad sustainable development – organic growth – value
oriented marketing are naturally blending and sustain each other (Kotler et al., 2010).
We consider that in the future research it is possible to determine the extent to which the
vision, mission and company’s values can be compatible with organic growth principles,
given the fact that organic growth marketing in the hotel industry goes beyond tourism
marketing. Also, one can take into account the fact that the integration of sustainable
development and organic growth principles leads to a greater manifestation of the relationship
marketing, ecological marketing, social marketing, and direct marketing elements.
Organic growth marketing of sustainable tourism business can become a true Marketing
3.0, where there are involved not only the clients (tourists) expectations but also those of
communities. In this case, it may be suitable an analysis of the possibility that both
sustainable development principles and those of organic growth to be included in the
Values-Based Matrix, a characteristic of Marketing 3.0, as seen in the model illustrated in
figure no. 2.

COMPANY

Vision

Mission

Values

Organic growth
principles
Customer Orientation
Creation of an organic
growth philosophy
Performances
measurement
Efficiency of processes
Organizational culture

Mind

INDIVIDUAL
Heart

Spirit

ProfitAbility

ReturnAbility

SustainAbility

Deliver
SATISFACTION

Achieving
ASPIRATIONS

Practice
COMPASSION

Be BETTER

DIFFERENTIATE

Make a
DIFFERENCE

Figure no. 2: Integration of organic growth principles in Value Based Matrix
Source: processed and adapted from Kotler, Kartajaya and Setiawan, 2010, p. 42.
The conducted qualitative research, by identifying attitudes and behaviors, creates the
possibility of a further quantitative research, which can create certain models whose
variables can describe the functional form of the symbiosis and, possibly, the syncretism
between the exploratory identified variables in this article.
The future quantitative research can also highlight the extent to which all three dimensions
of a sustainable business can be at the basis of marketing strategies in order to create the
smart growth philosophy of an organization.
Acknowledgements
This paper is supported by the Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources
Development (SOP HRD), financed from the European Social Fund and by the Romanian
Government under the project number POSDRU/159/1.5/S/134378.

