
INTRODUCTION

Supply Chain Management (SCM) is increasingly
gaining attention both among managers and scholars.
Managing their supply chains is a practical necessity
for many companies and scholars have extensively
investigated the antecedents of SCM practices and
their connection with corporate (and also supply
chain) performance (e.g., [1][2]). While survey
research has also addressed various forms of
efficiency, these constructs are usually assessed
through rating questions directed towards managers.
For example, Gligor et al. [3] measure operational
efficiency along the five items of efficiency in
managing operational cost, material and inventory
costs, wastes in processes and material wastage,
transportation and distribution cost, and optimal use
of resources, capacity, and time, by means of a sevenpoint scale that range from “strongly disagree” to
“strongly agree”. This means that survey research
conceives managers as experts and asks them to
evaluate efficiency as a whole or various facets
thereof. Such direct evaluation based on intuition
and/or backed by data is one way of assessing
considered—at a strategic level—as input-output
system that transforms various invested resources into
various performance dimensions. Such analytic
assessment of SCM efficiency has been barely
attempted so far, which may be caused by the
incommensurability of inputs into and outputs from
SCM at the strategic level as well as their complex
interrelationship, forbidding simple calculation
techniques. Our analytical approach for assessing
efficiency resorting to a mathematical programming
technique adds to the current state-of-the-art in SCM
research and facilitates managerial decision-making
as it helps calibrating managerial expert opinion and
provides relative efficiency scores, that is, efficiency
scores relative to relevant peers. In a second step the
study investigates which factors influence these
relative efficiency scores, and hence identifies (some
of) the conditions under which investments into SCM
are costly and/or the benefits from SCM are poor.
In this way our approach offers an alternative view to
the currently predominant view in SCM research that
various investments into SCM render an increase in
performance and may ultimately lead to competitive
advantage, for example through cost reduction,
increased flexibility and hence customer service, or
reduced time-to-market of new products (e.g., [2]). In
fact, many studies investigate cause-and-effect
relationships between practices and performance
(with various mediating and moderating effects);
however, they barely zoom into the efficiency of
SCM implementation per se (for a notable exception
see [4]). We posit that business practice is not only
interested in the question whether investments in
SCM contribute positively, negatively or not at all to
firm performance, but also how “efficient” or
“inefficient” SCM actually is. Therefore, the purpose
of this study is to draw the attention of SCM scholars
towards the analytic investigation of SCM efficiency
in comparison to relevant peer organizations. Hence
we ask the following research question: How may
relative efficiency of SCM implementation be
assessed? In response to this question we report the
procedure of one possible methodological approach
for such investigation and we illustrate the approach
by assessing relative SCM efficiencies from the
buyer’s perspective, based on a data sample of
European manufacturing plants. In a second step we
identify (facilitating and impeding) factors that are
likely to influence these efficiency scores through a
regression analysis.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
After presenting literature on antecedents (facilitators
and impediments) and implications (performance) of
SCM, we point to the dearth of studies assessing the
efficiency of SCM implementation in an analytic way,
and review the use of two-step DEA (Data
Envelopment Analysis)-regression approaches in the
field of SCM research. Then we describe and discuss

the procedure of our proposed methodological
approach and link it to our specific empirical
application. After reporting the results of the DEA
and regression model, we discuss the findings against
the background of previous research, and we highlight
how the assessment of relative SCM efficiencies
through DEA contributes to the academic knowledge
base and generates additional insights for managers.
The conclusions highlight limitations of the proposed
approach as well as the specific empirical application,
and point towards directions of future research.

2.

LITERATURE REVIEW

After defining core concepts of SCM, performance
and efficiency, this section first reviews previous
research on facilitators and impediments of SCM and
its link to business performance. Then, we show the
relative blank of assessments of SCM efficiency and
point out why this blank warrants to be filled.
Subsequently, we briefly review how our
methodological approach for conducting such an
efficiency assessment (i.e., two-step DEA-regression)
has so far been used, in particular in the field of SCM
research. Finally, we review how SCM could be
designed as an input-output system at the strategic
level.
2.1 Defining core concepts
Although there is generally little consensus regarding
the definition of SCM [5], Mentzer et al.’s [6] broad
and trans-disciplinary definition provides some
common ground. According to Mentzer et al. [6],
SCM is defined as “the systemic, strategic
coordination of the traditional business functions and
the tactics across these business functions within a
particular company and across businesses within the
supply chain, for the purposes of improving the longterm performance of the individual companies and the
supply chain as a whole” (p.18). Firm performance
may be split in operational performance and business
performance in the way that measures of operational
performance (referring to cost, flexibility, quality,
etc.) affect business performance measures such as
profit, market share, and customer satisfaction [7].
Finally, based on the common definition of efficiency
as the ratio of outputs to inputs, we define SCM
efficiency as the ratio of performance dimensions
achieved to the resources invested into SCM.
2.2 The traditional cause-and-effect view on SCM,
its antecedents and implications
The concept of SCM has often been conceptualized as
a triple-jump-model, linking antecedents of SCM to
the implementation of SCM practices and these to
firm (and also supply chain) performance (e.g., [8]).
Antecedents of SCM comprise inter-organisational
factors that define the buyer-supplier or overall supply
chain relationship as well as organisational factors,
often conceived from the perspective of the buying
competence, goodwill (openness and benevolence),
vulnerability and loyalty; power (in the form of
coercive, expert and referent power); and dependence
[10] which may be seen as reciprocal to power [11].
Further inter-organisational factors are reciprocity in
forms of mutual benefits as suggested by social
exchange theory [8], and relational commitment
aiming for long-term partnership and likely entailing
sacrifice and important resource investments [12].
Organisational factors influencing the implementation
of SCM are for example firm size, which effects
positively the engagement into SCM due to the
extensive resource and capabilities endowment of
larger companies in comparison to smaller ones
[13][14]; furthermore, foreign ownership [15][16],
and internationality of purchasing [17][18].
Many scholars advocate a positive relationship
between SCM implementation (as for example
through supply chain collaboration and integration)
and firm performance (e.g., [19]); still it is conceded
that the suitability of supply chain collaboration and
integration needs to be assessed individually [20], for
example according to the criteria of strategic
relevance and interaction complexity as suggested by
[21]. It may be noted at this place that overall
empirical evidence for such a link is not entirely
clear-cut. Mackelprang et al.’s [22] meta-analysis
found a nuanced picture of this link when considering
the various dimensions of supply chain integration
and the various dimensions of performance (such as
financial, market, cost, quality, delivery, flexibility,
innovation); the meta-analysis concludes by warning
against viewing supply chain integration as
universally improving performance (cf. also [23]) and
calls for searching for so far undetected moderating
variables such as cultural or social issues and process
types.
2.3 Efficiency of supply chain management
While cause-and-effect relationships between SCM
antecedents, SCM, and performance (including
various moderating and mediating effects) are
currently in the limelight of empirical research,
economic
efficiency
assessment
of
SCM
implementation itself is largely under-researched.
Liang et al. [24] develop DEA-based non-linear
programs for measuring supply chain efficiency, and
they illustrate their approach in a seller-buyer supply
chain context representing either a leader-follower or
a cooperative structure. Chen et al. [25] propose an
approach for defining a productivity frontier for twostage processes, where the outputs of the first stage
process are the inputs to the second stage process (see
also the review by Cook et al. [26]). Saranaga and
Moser [27] use value chain DEA approach for
estimating the performance of a purchasing and
supply management function for several industry
sectors. Swink and Zsidison [28] indicate that
increased commitment in buyer-supplier relationship

3

only pays off up to a certain point, highlighting
negative effects of excessive commitment particularly
in relation to costs and profit. Daugherty et al. [29]
argue that collaboration only pays off if carefully
managed and formalized. Adams et al. [30] point to
the crucial role of inter-organizational coordination
technologies,
mediating
supply
chain
collaboration/integration
and
performance.
Furthermore, Spekman et al. [21] point out that
suppliers and SCM strategy need to be carefully
chosen and investments in comprehensive (and hence
expensive) supply chain collaboration is certainly not
warranted in any case. It may be noted that most
previous research on SCM implementation and
performance largely overlook the question of how
“efficient” or “inefficient” SCM is implemented at a
strategic level, that is how efficient this management
tools transforms various inputs (resources,
investments) into outputs (performance); for notable
exceptions see Bayraktar et al. [4] assessing the
efficiency of SCM and information systems practices
and Easton et al. [31] assessing the efficiency of the
purchasing process in the petroleum industry. Further
related work to efficiency analysis is dealing only
with selected supply chain processes, e.g., supplier
evaluation [32], manufacturing processes [33], and
distribution processes [34].
Such an efficiency assessment can add significant
value since it looks at the strategic concept of SCM
from a distinct economic angle, and helps managers to
assess whether their implementation of SCM is done
as resource efficient as it could be. Such an angle that
zooms into the concept of SCM itself and calculates
SCM efficiencies in an analytic way complements the
currently predominant research on the statistical and
causal relationships between SCM implementation
and performance. In a subsequent step, one may ask
which factors influence this efficiency score, which is
similar to the currently wide-spread cause-and-effect
investigations into the antecedents of SCM.
There is a variety of theoretical angles that could be
used for shedding light on why companies work
together in a supply chain and how effective SCM
actually is. When bilateral dependency builds up,
transaction cost economics suggests supply chain
partnership as hybrid mode of governance situated
between market and hierarchy [35]. Similarly,
resource-dependency theory explains engagement in
SCM with the need of accessing crucial resources that
are held by other organizations [36]. Regarding the
question how firms strategize on a firm, dyad, and
supply chain level, and whether SCM is effective, the
resource-based view (RBV) [37] and its extension
towards the relational view of strategic management
[38] provide important insights. For example, Gold et
al. [39] conceptualize supply chain collaboration on
sustainability issues as a possible catalyst of valuable
inter-organizational resources that may lead to
their resources, and hence may affect the benefits that
accrue to an organization from supply chain
collaboration [38]. These theoretical angles (amongst
others) have been rather widely used by SCM scholars
in order to explain why companies engage in SCM,
and how SCM links to competitive advantage and
business performance.
However, these theories do not seem to be conclusive
on the question of how efficient the implementation of
SCM actually is. For example, an inter-organizational
resource such as joint learning in buyer-supplier
relationships may be valuable, rare, and hard to
imitate and substitute by competitors, and thus could
be regarded a source of competitive advantage [41].
This does not say much though about how costly it
was to develop and maintain this resource, and what
benefits it provides to the company in return. To fill
this gap, we propose DEA as an approach for
investigating the efficiency of SCM implementation,
which prepares and enables a follow-up in-depth
analysis of related SCM processes.
2.4 Applications of DEA-regression approaches
Two-step DEA-regression approaches (cf. e.g., [42])
are suitable for tackling these questions. DEA has
been applied mainly in the fields of banking,
healthcare, logistics, agriculture and farming,
transportation, and education [43][44][45]. In the field
of transportation, DEA was used for examining the
performance of airlines, airports, airport authorities as
well as railway and bus systems [43]. Barros and
Dieke [46] and Gillen and Lall [47] adopt the
combined two-step DEA-regression approach for
finding factors influencing the efficiency of airports.
Liu et al. [43] note that the two-step DEA-regression
approach is generally gaining importance and can
particularly be considered a trend in agricultural
research. Although DEA is a popular method with
diverse applications in the broad field of business
research and has also been applied to the fields of
transportation and logistics as well as purchasing and
supply chain management, this method has so far not
been used for assessing the efficiency of SCM
implementation. In the subsequent sub-section we will
describe our specific approach towards such
assessment.
2.5 Conceptualizing SCM as input-output system
In the current paper, we conceive SCM as a system
that is fed by various inputs and generates various
outputs for the buyer. Inputs consume company
resources in some way, while outputs represent the
gains from SCM. Thereby the transformation of
inputs into outputs is not further specified, i.e.
remains a “black box”. Generally speaking, SCM as a
system could be operationalized on an operational and
process level [48], on a functional level [31], or on a
comprehensive strategic level, as was attempted in the
extent paper. Concerning inputs, a variety of
parameters could be considered that represent

“expenses” in a broad sense and may comprise
leadership, strategic purchasing, advanced planning
systems, intra- and inter-organizational relationship
building, information sharing, knowledge building,
integration of logistics and operations, adaptation of
product development and marketing, supply and
distribution
network
structure
etc.
(e.g.,
[5][49][50][51][52]). Thereby SCM could be
conceived very broadly as a system that absorbs the
inputs (of all supply chain actors involved or specific
actors) and transforms them into benefits for these
actors. According to the initial definition of system
boundaries, outputs of SCM may be assessed on
various levels, e.g., on a plant, firm, or supply chain
level. Although several studies have advocated
seizing overarching supply chain performance (e.g.,
[53][54][55]), empirical studies still predominantly
measure performance from the perspective of one
supply chain actor, often the buying company. Chen
and Paulraj [49] for example, split buyer’s
performance into financial (e.g., return on investment,
firm’s net income before tax) and operational
performance (e.g., cost, quality, dependability,
flexibility, speed). The extant empirical application
presented in this paper defines the boundaries of SCM
rather narrowly for reasons of data availability,
joining input factors rather closely to the buyersupplier interface and assessing output factors from
the distinct perspective of the buying company.
The effectiveness of SCM, and related to this the
efficiency
scores
calculated
through
the
conceptualisation of SCM as input-output system,
could then be seen as caused by various factors. These
antecedents of SCM effectiveness and efficiency,
when perceived from the buyer’s angle, refer basically
to the buying plant’s characteristics such as size
[13][14], industry [56], national culture [57], or
foreign ownership [15][16]; the quality of
its
relationships with suppliers and customers [8][9][58];
characteristics of product portfolio [59][60]; supply
chain roles such as the roles of manufacturer,
distributor, retailer and service provider [51]; degree
of innovativeness such as number of newly introduced
products and product development speed [58][61];
type of supply chain, i.e. manufacturing versus service
supply chains [62]; specific risks and chances from
global sourcing [63]; perceived vulnerability of buyer
[64]; buyer’s strategic situation in particular regarding
its supply and distribution channels [65]. Within the
subsequent methodology section, we link our
selection of input and output parameters as well as
antecedents more specifically to previous literature,
thus justifying their choice while acknowledging
existing limitations of our empirical approach.

3.

METHODOLOGY

3.1 Data Envelopment Analysis as tool for
programming technique that determines relative
efficiencies of Decision Making Units (DMUs)
against an efficiency frontier which is defined by the
most efficient peers. DEA is suitable for
benchmarking performance [66] of any system even if
inputs and outputs are incommensurate due to
different measurement units [67] as long as DMUs are
comparable among each other. Dyson et al. [68]
specify different criteria that should be considered in
terms of homogeneity, e.g., DMUs have to undertake
similar activities such as manufacturing. Based on the
fact that DEA allows for aggregate comparison at the
strategic level, the modelling of the sub-processes of
different manufacturing companies is not required
[69]. Therefore, DEA is of high relevance for SCM
efficiency analysis at the strategic level, i.e., to
identify the most competitive DMUs that may serve
as benchmark for less efficient units. Thereby, Dyson
et al. [68] state that differences between the DMUs
are naturally of interest for DEA, e.g., typical strategic
decisions such as different technologies used by the
DMUs.
In their seminal paper, Charnes et al. [70] proposed
that the efficiency score of any DMU is obtained “as
the maximum of a ratio of weighted outputs to
weighted inputs subject to the condition that the
similar ratios for every DMU be less than or equal to
unity” (p.430). Another alternative could be to start
with the output and to look at the ratio of input to
output [71]. This may be formulated as,
s
m

max − j +  ∑ si+ + ∑ sr− 
+
λ j ,θ , si , sr
r =1
 i =1

s.t.
n

∑X λ
j

j =1
n

∑Y λ
j =1

j

j

λ j ≥ 0,

+ si+ = xi 0 ,

∀ i =1,  , m

− sr− = jyr 0 ,

∀ r =1,  , s

j

∀j
(1)

where φ is the efficiency score for DMUO;
yr0 is the output r generated by DMUO; xi0 is the input
i used by DMUO;
Xj = (x1j,x2j,…..,xmj) is the vector of actual inputs used
by DMUO;
Yj = (y1j,y2j,…..,ysj) is the vector of actual outputs
generated by DMUO;

si+ is the amount of slack in input i for DMU ; sr− is
O

the amount of slack in output r for DMUO. λj is the
dual multiplier; j = 1, …, n is the number of DMU; i =
1, …, m is the number of input
and r = 1, …, s is the number of output.

5

As one distinct advantage, DEA can be applied even
if it is unknown how exactly inputs are transformed
into outputs [44]. As well, DEA does not require the
analyst to know relative weights of input and output
variables or subjectively attribute those weights [72].
3.2 Empirical application: Data
For investigating SCM efficiency and its antecedents
by two-step DEA-regression, we use data from the
Global Manufacturing Research Group (GMRG), an
association of international scholars. GMRG has
collected data from manufacturing plants in numerous
countries since 1985 (www.gmrg.org) through
standardized questionnaires, of which items and
measurements have been continuously improved in
annual meetings. This concerted endeavour as well as
rigorous translation and back-translation between
English and local languages allow for data pooling
[73][74]. For our analysis, we use data of the fourth
round of the GMRG survey, which was gathered
between 2006 and 2009. The survey targeted plant
managers (as key informants) who are experts in
terms of their manufacturing plant’s processes and
operations.
We first selected those EU-EFTA countries, for which
data from three GMRG questionnaires were available,
covering a set of variables for both DEA and
subsequent regression analysis; then we excluded
listwise all plants for which data for one or more of
our variables were missing. This procedure was hence
driven by data availability and resulted in a sample
size of 164 plants spread over seven European
countries, namely Austria (8), Germany (53), Ireland
(33), Italy (33), Sweden (22), and Switzerland (15). It
may be noted that the selection of variables for both
DEA and regression analysis was conducted on
theoretical grounds as explained below, but was
restricted by actual availability of data. Empirical
follow-up analyses may operationalise input and
output factors (hence SCM efficiency) as well as
factors driving and impeding SCM efficiency in more
specific and/or more comprehensive ways.
3.3 Empirical application: DEA
We transfer the application of DEA from
organisations to the rather intangible concept of
corporate SCM implementation which we conceive as
an input-output system that is to be optimized, against
the benchmarks of relevant peers. For assessing the
efficiency of SCM, we conceive SCM as a system that
is fed by various inputs and generates various outputs
for the buyer. Inputs all represent expenses in a broad
sense, while outputs represent benefits from SCM
practices for the buyer. Due to a limited scope of
constructs with sufficient data available, the supply
chain focus of this study mainly pertains to the buyersupplier interface and benefits are measured from the
perspective of the buyer only. Future studies may look
more broadly at multiple tiers of the supply chain and
Table 1 lists the 4 input variables and 5 output
variables used for the DEA model; the number of
variables to be included in the DEA was well within
the rule of thumb given a sample size of 164 [68].
Input variables comprise buyer sponsored supplier
conferences, supplier representatives in plants, formal
supplier development programs and top management
support of purchasing. They are all linked to supplierbuyer integration and buyer performance but represent
major expenses, in terms of invested organisational
resources.
Buyer sponsored supplier conferences refer to
meetings with suppliers that clarify mutual
expectations and reflect on how to develop the buyersupplier relationship, and have been found to
contribute to supplier-buyer integration and
performance [50][57][76]. Supplier representatives in
plants may be conceived as boundary spanners that
can be integrated in cross-functional teams thus
increasing communication and knowledge sharing,
ultimately leading to enhanced risk management,

product and process innovation, and customer value
[57][77][78]. Formal supplier development programs
are strategic activities of buying companies to ensure
that the suppliers meet their expectations regarding
product quality and other performance criteria, thus
contributing to the performance of the buying
company and ideally of the entire supply chain
[79][80][81]. Top management support of purchasing
that ensures access to organisational resources helps
strengthening the overall strategic role of purchasing
and supply management, and was found to contribute
substantially to all performance dimensions including
social and environmental sustainability [49][82][83].
We measure the output of SCM by a variety of
operational performance measures such as product
cost, product quality, dependability (delivery as
promised), flexibility, and new product design time
[49][84][85]. Operational performance indicators are
more likely to measure the immediate benefits by
SCM implementation, in contrast to financial
performance indicators such as market share that are
more likely to be influenced by factors external to
firms and supply chains [49]

Table 1: Input and output variables of DEA
Variable

Type of
variable

Description

Unit

Reference

Buyer
sponsored
supplier
conferences
(SSC)
Supplier
representatives
in plant (SR)
Formal supplier
development
program (SDP)
Top
management
support
of
purchasing
Total
product
costs (C)

Input

To what extent do SSC contribute to the
organization’s competitive goals?

Likert scale from 1 (no
extent) to 7 (a great
extent)

[50][57]

Input

To what extent do SR contribute to the
organization’s competitive goals?

from 1 (no
7 (a great

[57][77]
[78]

Input

To what extent do SDP contribute to the
organization’s competitive goals?

from 1 (no
7 (a great

[79][80]
[81]

Input

To what degree does top management
support the strategic importance of
purchasing by providing adequate
financial resources?
Plant’s performance compared with
competitors regarding C

Likert scale
extent) to
extent)
Likert scale
extent) to
extent)
Likert scale
extent) to
extent)

from 1 (no
7 (a great

[49][82]
[83]

Perceived
overall product
quality (Q)

Output

Plant’s performance compared
competitors regarding Q

with

Likert scale from 1 (far
worse) to 7 (far better)

Delivery
as
promised (D)

Output

Plant’s performance compared
competitors regarding D

with

Likert scale from 1 (far
worse) to 7 (far better)

Delivery
flexibility (F)

Output

Plant’s performance compared
competitors regarding F

with

Likert scale from 1 (far
worse) to 7 (far better)

New
product
design time (N)

Output

Plant’s performance compared
competitors regarding N

with

Likert scale from 1 (far
worse) to 7 (far better)

Output

Likert scale from 1 (far
worse) to 7 (far better)

[49][84]
to scale, that is Charnes et al.’s [70] so-called CCR
model, named according to the surname initials of the
authors Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes. We do not
impose any weight restrictions on input and output
variables; hence DEA attributes freely weights to the
variables as determined by equation (1).
3.4 Empirical application: Subsequent regression
analysis
Following from the results of the DEA, we explore
factors fostering or impeding SCM efficiency based
on a regression model. When using the DEA
efficiency scores as outcome variable of regression
models, these scores cause problems as they are nonparametric and serially correlated “in an unknown and
complicated way” (p.415) [86]. In addition, the DEA
scores of our output-oriented model represent a data
set censored left at the value 1; this means that the
DEA scores never go below 1. Despite the consensus
regarding the specificities of DEA scores as outcome
variable of subsequent regression analysis, there is a
lack of consensus regarding which approach to take in
a second stage regression.
Based on a comparison of four second stage
regression approaches Hoff [87] concludes that “the
tobit model, or even OLS, may be sufficient for
modelling DEA scores against exogenous variables”
(p.434) [87], while she discourages the use of inflated
beta models. Simar and Wilson [88][89] criticize these
conclusions and recommend the use of bootstrap
methods instead; again, the benefits of Simar and
Wilson’s [89] proposed procedure are largely
contested by Friesner et al. [86] who suggest that
Simar and Wilson’s [88][89] bootstrapped truncated
regression
approach
only
generates
small
improvements in second stage estimates. Despite this
ongoing academic debate, it appears to be unequivocal
in literature that the bootstrapped truncated regression
generates better results than other commonly applied
techniques such as Tobit models or OLS. For this
reason, we have chosen to use the second
bootstrapped truncated regression algorithm proposed
by Simar and Wilson [88], as implemented in the
rDEA package for R [90].
In this method, the DEA scores are first calculated as
usual, and used as the dependent variable in a
truncated regression with the environmental variables
as the independent variables, estimated using the
method of maximum likelihood. The regression
coefficients and error variances from this stage are
then used in a parametric bootstrap to estimate the
bias in each DEA estimate. These bias estimates are

then used to construct bias-corrected DEA estimates
from the original DEA estimates. These bias-corrected
DEA estimates are then once again used to estimate a
truncated regression model with the bias-corrected
DEA estimates as the outcome variable, and the
environmental variables as the predictor variables.
Finally, another parametric bootstrap is used to
produce bootstrapped confidence intervals for the
regression coefficients for the final regression model.
Our regression model assumes that efficiency in SCM
depends on plant’s characteristics such as number of
employees [13][14], ratio of foreign ownership
[15][16], country, i.e. national culture [57];
characteristics of production such as diversity of
production [59][60] and the number of newly
introduced products [58][61]; buyer’s purchasing
situation encompassing the importance of purchasing
(i.e. the ratio of costs for purchased material against
overall manufacturing cost) [64] and ratio of
internationally purchased material [63]; and
characteristics of buyer-supplier relationship such as
information asymmetry in supplier evaluation [91][92]
and conflict settlement [93]. We acknowledge that
there are further variables that could have an impact
on SCM efficiency and/or could have been controlled
for—as outlined in the literature review—that we
could not include in our empirical model due to the
restrictions imposed by the truncated nature of our
dependent variable and the number of observations.
The model specification for the truncated regression
is:
DEA∗ i = B1 + B2 NEi + B3 POi + B4 DPi + B5 NPi +
B6 IMPi + B7 INPi + B8 IAi + B9 CSi + B10 GEi + ui
(2)
As the efficiency score DEAi is obtained by
mathematical optimization as outlined by formula (1),
we define a transformed variable DEA*i as outcome
variable of the truncated regression. DEA*i represents
the virtual plant efficiency taking into account that
efficiency scores (DEA*i) feature a left-hand limit at 1,
which denominates most efficient plants (i.e. plants on
the efficiency frontier):
DEAi = 1 if DEA∗ i ≤ 1
(3)
DEAi = DEA∗ i if DEA∗ i > 1
(4)
where i = 1, …, n is the number of plants;
DEA*i = virtual plant efficiency;
DEAi = calculated plant efficiency
Table 2 presents and describes the outcome variable as
well
as
the
predictor

Table 2: Predictor and outcome variables for the bootstrapped truncated regression
Variables

Label

Type of
variable

Description

DEA score

DEA

Outcome

The DEA score assessing the
plant’s SCM efficiency

Country

GE

Number of
employees
Foreign
ownership
Diversity of
production
Newly
introduced
products

Importance of
purchasing
Internationality
of purchasing

Information
asymmetry in
supplier
evaluation

Conflict
settlement

Control variable
Germany as location of the plant
(dummy variable)
Plant’s characteristics
NE
Predictor Approximately how many total
employees work for the plant?
PO
Predictor What percent of the plant
ownership is international?
Characteristics of production
DP
Predictor How many product lines or product
families does the plant produce?
NP
Predictor What percent of plant sales is
currently from products that have
been introduced in the last two
years?
Buyer's purchasing situation
IMP
Predictor About what percent of the plant’s
total manufacturing cost is for
material?
INP
Predictor What percent of your plant material
costs
are
purchased
from
international sources?
Characteristics of buyer-supplier relationship
IA
Predictor Please indicate the degree to which
you agree with the following
statements in relation to your most
important supplier: It is easy to
determine the performance of this
supplier.
CS
Predictor Please indicate the degree to which
you agree with the following
statements in relation to your most
important supplier: This supplier
and my firm have developed a
standard approach to solving
problems when they arise.
Predictor

Figure 1 presents the complete research model, which
uses, in a first step, DEA for assessing relative SCM
efficiency and, in a second step, bootstrapped
truncated regression analysis for investigating driving
and impeding factors for SCM efficiency scores.

Unit

Reference

1, …, ∞

0 or 1

[57]

Employees

[13][14]

%

[15][16]

Product lines or
product families
%

[59][60]

%

[64]

%

[63]

Likert scale from
1
(completely
agree)
to
4
(completely
disagree)

[91][92]

Likert scale from
1
(completely
agree)
to
4
(completely
disagree)

[93]


Figure 1: Research model

Step 1: DEA
Inputs
•
•
•
•

Outputs

Buyer sponsored supplier
conferences
Supplier representatives in
plant
Formal supplier development
program
Top management support of
purchasing

Step 2:
Bootstrapped
truncated regression
•
•
•
•

•
•

Supply Chain
Management
Efficiency

•
•
•

Total product costs
Perceived overall product
quality
Delivery as promised
Delivery flexibility
New product design time

Outcome variable

Predictor variables

Number of employees
Foreign ownership
Diversity of production
Newly introduced products

•
•
•
•

Importance of purchasing
Internationality of purchasing
Information asymmetry in
supplier evaluation
Conflict settlement

Table 3: Classification of inefficiencies by DEA
4.

RESULTS

The DEA results in an average efficiency score of
2.02 and altogether 34 maximum efficient plants (i.e.,
plants with DEA scores equal to 1). Table 3 gives an
overview of the distribution of DEA scores. The
higher the DEA score, the more inefficient is the
plant. Table 4 provides additional information on the
34 maximum efficient plants in terms of country and
industry sector. It highlights which countries and
industry sectors are situated at the productivity
frontier, in absolute numbers and relative to their
occurrence within our sample.

Range

Number of plants

DEA = 1

34

1 < DEA <= 2

74

2 < DEA <= 3

28

3 < DEA <= 4

14

4 < DEA <= 5

6

5 < DEA <= 6

4

6 < DEA <= 7

3

DEA > 7


Absolute

Relative

Industry sector

Absolute

Relative

Austria

3

0.38

2

0.67

Germany

12

0.23

6

0.35

Sweden

5

0.23

1

0.33

1

0.33

1

0.25

Switzerland

3

0.20

Printing, publishing, and allied
industries
Electronic and other electrical
equipment and components,
except computer equipment
Manufacture of motor vehicles,
trailers and semi-trailers
Manufacture of other transport
equipment
Textile mill products

Ireland

6

0.18

Primary metal industries

1

0.25

Italy

5

0.15

Paper and allied products,

1

0.25

Fabricated metal products,
except machinery and
transportation equipment
Chemicals and allied products

7

0.21

1

0.20

Rubber and miscellaneous
plastics products
Industrial and commercial
machinery and computer
equipment
Food and kindred products

2

0.20

7

0.19

2

0.18

Measuring, analysing, and
controlling instruments;
photographic, medical and
optical goods; watches and
clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing
industries
Lumber and wood products,
except furniture
Furniture and fixtures

1

0.09

1

0.08

0

0

0

0

Leather and leather products

0

0

Stone, clay, glass, and concrete
products

0

0

The bootstrapped truncated regression model (see
Table 5) shows how predictor variables explain
inefficiencies of plants. This means that a positive
coefficient specifies that predictor variables contribute
to inefficiencies, whereas a negative coefficient
defines that predictors reduce inefficiencies, i.e. plants
move towards their efficiency frontier. The model
indicates that the number of employees and foreign
ownership are positively linked to SCM inefficiency.
Country affiliation, diversity of production, newly
introduced products, importance of purchasing,
degree of purchasing from international sources, and

standardized conflict settlement are negatively linked
to SCM inefficiency. This means that these variables
increase the efficiency of SCM implementation of
plants and bring them closer to the efficiency frontier.
Buyer-supplier information asymmetry does not have
significant impacts. The truncated regression model
was tested for goodness of fit by a likelihood ratio
test; a highly significant result for this test indicates
that the inclusion of the predictor variables
significantly
improves
the
Variables
Constant
Country (Germany)
Number of employees

Coefficient
-41.822065 ***
-19.2227***
0.005128+

Foreign ownership

55.531578***

Diversity of production

-0.072883***

Newly introduced
products
Importance of purchasing

-3.232185**

Internationality of
purchasing
Information asymmetry
in supplier evaluation
Conflict settlement

-52.011556***
-51.514951***
-2.833392
-6.583710**

Note: ***p<.001; **p<.01; *p<.05; +p<0.1
5. DISCUSSIONS
This section first presents the findings of our
empirical illustration in the light of previous research,
also considering related managerial implications.
Then, our proposed approach of conceiving SCM
efficiency at a strategic level as an input-output
system to be assessed by DEA is discussed regarding
its novelty and usefulness for scholars and managers.
Our analysis suggests that country affiliation, the
characteristics of manufacturing plants, characteristics
of production, buyer’s purchasing situation, and the
characteristics of buyer-supplier relationship influence
SCM efficiency. Given the differences in SCM
implementation induced by national cultural [57], it is
little astonishing that SCM efficiency appears to be
influenced by the country the plant is located in. In
terms of the characteristics of manufacturing plants,
the size of a manufacturing plant (number of
employees) is linked at a low significance level to
inefficiencies in SCM. This is somewhat in contrast to
earlier findings that firm size facilitates SCM due to
large firms’ crucial resource and capability
endowment [14]. In fact, it might be true that larger
firms are more prone to engage in SCM activities; this
does not necessarily mean, however, that SCM is
carried out in a particularly efficient way by larger
firms. We suggest that managers keep a wary eye on
inefficiencies that might be linked to bureaucratic
slack or additional costs of intra-organizational crossfunctional collaboration and integration, which may
increase with the size of the plant or organisation,
respectively.

11

Furthermore, our analysis finds some evidence that
foreign plant ownership makes SCM inefficient.
Foreign ownership has been connected to the
availability of extensive (financial and other)
resources which may be used to engage in supplier
development, relationship building, and SCM in
general [13][15][16]. This does not imply however
that SCM itself is carried out efficiently by foreignowned plants. On the contrary, it seems that cultural
misconceptions [94] between owners, management
and employees may create frictions that tend to turn
SCM practices by foreign-owned firms rather
inefficient. This argument may be used for cautioning
managers about engaging too hastily in international
mergers and acquisitions. For further exploring this
issue, the efficiency of SCM implementation may be
investigated contingent for example on the degree of
international ownership, cultural difference, and date
of merger or acquisition.
According to our analysis, diversity of production—
operationalized as the number of product lines or
product families produced in the plant—appears to
contribute to SCM efficiency. This might be
explained by the need of those plants to develop a
greater degree of professionalization, formalization
and technological support of purchasing and supply
chain management for example through e-purchasing,
relational technologies, and standardized supplier
evaluation [29][30][95]. At the same time, a high ratio
of plant sales from products that have been introduced
in the preceding two years is also linked to SCM
efficiency.
In terms of buyer's purchasing situation, we find that
the importance of purchasing, i.e. the ratio of a plant’s
material cost to all manufacturing cost, as well as the
degree of purchasing from international sources
increases SCM efficiency. Beneficial effects of
international purchasing are in line with Mol et al.
[18] who argue that international sourcing allows for
selecting world-class suppliers while minimizing
costs. Although still debated, there is rather strong
support for the view that international purchasing
contributes to the purchasing firm’s performance;
Quintens et al. [96] mention in their literature review
the following benefits (among others): high product
quality, better delivery, access to world-class
technology,
more
satisfying
supplier-buyer
relationships. Related costs for example regarding
transportation and handling, administration, customs,
and additional global risks of damage and supply
disruption appear to be only secondary [97]. It may
however be noted that in particular the costs of
transportation and warehousing would gain weight
when assessing performance more comprehensively
on the triple bottom line (social, environmental, and
economic performance) [98] and when extending
Regarding the characteristics of buyer-supplier
relationship, an established approach to solve
problems between supplier and buyer contributes to
efficiency of SCM implementation; in contrast, we
cannot find a statistically significant link between
information symmetry in supplier evaluation and
SCM efficiency. Previous research has conceived
inter-organisational aspects as key antecedents of
SCM. Factors such as trust, reciprocity and common
codes are generally considered to be the grease that
facilitates
buyer-supplier
relationships
(e.g.,
[8][9][10]); moreover, collaborative relationships
have been often linked to improved performance,
backed by the arguments of risk management and
mitigation [101], access to required external resources
[102] and synergetic effects of complementary
resources and capabilities [103]. On the other hand,
literature points to the fact that supply chain
partnerships often do not yield the expected benefits
[104]. In fact, developing buyer-supplier relationships
requires high degrees of commitment and investment
from all parties involved [21]; these investments may
(over-)compensate for improved performance
outcomes [28]. Here a limitation of our research
design appears, namely the dearth of indicators for
relationship quality. Future studies may exactly focus
on these aspects (i.e., trust, mutuality, common
language, personal ties) for evaluating the link
between relationship quality and SCM efficiency in a
broader and deeper way.
Summing up, we argue that SCM should not be
implemented without considering its benefits against
the expenses, put on both sides of the scales. The
overall efficiency of SCM depends on a careful choice
of supply chain strategy [21][65], partner selection,
inter-organizational synergies [104], and clear
objectives and standards [29]. We call for a more
economically aware approach towards assessing the
benefits of SCM implementation, including various
forms of “efficiency analysis”. The popular phrasing
of “investing into relationships” too easily may blur
the view and soothe the heart of managers regarding
which returns on investment are to be expected at
which point of time. It is clear that investments in
SCM that do not feature positive net present value
weaken the overall competitive position of the
company.
Our proposed methodological approach represents a
novel way of conceiving and assessing relative SCM
efficiency at a strategic level. It focusses on the
question of how efficient SCM endeavours are, which
has been neglected by previous research that
predominantly
investigated
cause-and-effect
relationships between antecedents, SCM practices and
firm/supply chain performance. In this way, the
conceptualisation of SCM efficiency as input-output
system and DEA as mathematical programming

technique to assess relative SCM efficiencies, open up
new fields of enquiry for SCM academics. At the
same time, conceptualisation and related technique
encourage managers to re-assess the overall benefit of
their plants’ specific implementation of SCM, and for
this end, represent a valuable analytic tool to compare
their plants’ efficiency of SCM implementation at a
strategic level with that of their peers. In this way our
paper responds to Ferdows et al. [105] who claim that
operations management literature is not sufficiently
dealing with the growing complexity and
opportunities of supply chain networks, so that
research could be of direct guidance for managerial
decision-making. Consequently, it is necessary to
develop new quantitative tools and approaches for
managers. In this respect, the presented approach of
conceptualising and assessing SCM efficiency at the
strategic level might contribute to enriching
managers’ analytic toolkit and improve SCM related
decision-making. Yang et al. [106] underline as well
that DEA is suitable for the evaluation of competitive
strategy and efficiency. The presented novel approach
helps investigating factors driving SCM efficiency at
the strategic level, so to systematically deal with the
related complexities in supply chains. DMUs compete
with each other to maximize their DEA efficiency
score; thereby, the competitiveness efficient frontier is
the minimal curve containing all current positions in
an industry [107].

6.

CONCLUSIONS

This study reframes the implementation of the popular
management concept of SCM from the angle of the
economic principle of efficiency, which has been
neglected in scholarly literature so far. This has
implications for management practice and SCM
theory.
On a managerial side, it may be concluded that
strategy and specific orientation (goals, partners,
formalization, synergies, risk levels) need to be
carefully accounted for when implementing SCM;
otherwise the implementation of SCM may turn out to
be overly costly while rendering mediocre benefits. In
this way, the study reminds managers to be alert and
critical when investing in SCM and when appraising
these investments; the view of SCM as a strategic
means to some (often vague) long-term goals would
profit from being complemented by a more
operational view on SCM focusing on its efficiency
(understood as ratio of outputs and inputs). In this
way, managers may monitor the accrued benefits from
their investments into SCM along different points in
time, and then have a more in-depth look into the
processes and contingency factors that impact on the
efficiency level of their SCM implementation.
On an academic side, the commonly assumed link
related inputs (i.e., costs, investments, resources of all
kind) that is necessary for implementing the specific
SCM activities. Therefore, SCM scholars may direct
their attention towards the need of developing theory
that allows differentiated insights into when (and
when not) and how SCM implementation is overall
beneficial to a company (and its supply chain) from a
cost-benefit perspective. Such a distinct focus on
SCM efficiency complements the existing body of
knowledge that focusses on the reasons why
companies engage in SCM, and on the cause-andeffect relationships between SCM antecedents, SCM,
and competitive advantage, under consideration of
various mediating and moderating variables.
Still, the proposed conceptual and methodological
approach does not go without limitations. On the
methodological side, it may be highlighted that DEA
does not model the processes in detail, i.e. it remains
unobserved how inputs are actually transformed into
outputs. While this shortcoming applies for all DEA
approaches, it may be even more striking when
considering a highly abstract concept such as SCM at
a strategic level. Further analysis would be necessary
to understand the implications of the results provided
by the strategic SCM efficiency analysis at a tactical
and operational level. For this end, tools such as the
supply-chain operations reference (SCOR) model may
help breaking supply chain business processes down
to single activities and their components, while
providing a hierarchical performance measurement
system that facilitates understanding and hence
improving SCM efficiency.
In addition, the empirical application for illustrating
our conceptual and methodological approach faces
some substantial shortcomings, in particular regarding
the specific operationalisation and assessment of
relative SCM efficiency as input-output system,
which was restricted by data availability.
Furthermore, data from the fourth round of the
REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

Gligor DM, Holcomb MC (2014) Antecedents
and consequences of integrating logistics
capabilities
across
the
supply
chain.
Transportation Journal 53(2):211-234
Jin YH, Fawcett AM, Fawcett SE (2013)
Awareness is not enough: Commitment and
performance implications of supply chain
integration. International Journal of Physical
Distribution
and
Logistics
Management
43(3):205-230
Gligor DM, Esmark CL, Holcomb MC (2015)
Performance outcomes of supply chain agility:
When should you be agile?. Journal of
Operations Management 33-34:71-82
Bayraktar E, Gunasekaran A, Koh SCL, Tatoglu
E, Demirbag M, Zaim S (2010) An efficiency

13

GMRG survey, gathered from 2006 to 2009, was
used, which needs to be accounted for when
interpreting and drawing conclusions from the results.
Despite these limitations, the empirical part of the
paper clearly helps demonstrating our approach and
facilitates its replicability as well as critical
assessment and discussion in future research.
Regarding follow-up research, it might be of
particular interest to investigate in more details under
which conditions (in terms of external business
environment as well as internal company and supply
chain strategies) and according to which pattern
investments into supplier-buyer relationship are likely
to pay off. Are aspects such as trust, reciprocity,
common codes overrated academic and consultancy
fads which lure companies into inefficient business
practice or are they drivers of efficiency for certain
strategic options? Furthermore, it might be promising
to assess how various types of buyer-supplier power
relations [108] and purchasing situations [109]
influence the efficiency of SCM implementation.
Here, the buyer’s perspective on SCM efficiency
could be matched with the supplier’s perspective on
demand chain management efficiency. Moreover, the
proposed approach of calculating relative SCM
efficiency via DEA would warrant further critical
methodological discussion as well as empirical
application in order to assess its usefulness. In
addition, SCM efficiency assessment through DEA
would need to be followed up by business process
analyses that help understanding low efficiency levels
and finding leverage points to improve these levels.
Finally, the complex construct of SCM efficiency may
be assessed empirically by more specific and/or
comprehensive sets of input and output parameters so
to better grasp its essence. Thereby our conceptual
perspective on SCM efficiency on a strategic level as
an input-output system needs to be further assessed
for its validity and applicability by follow-up
research.