
1 Introduction
Early deﬁnitions of supply chain management (SCM)
typically emphasised the management of activities and
material ﬂows, whereas more recent SCM deﬁnitions have
largely focused on managing the supply chain (SC) as one
system with clear strategic goals [1]. Hence, there has
been a shift towards managing SC members to gain
mutual beneﬁts and a concentration on a SC-centric rather
than an organisation-centric view. Within a SC, ﬁrms need
to provide basic management resources, both internally
and in relation to their SC partners, to develop main
capabilities in relation to SCM execution [2]. Hence, there
has been a change of focus from the process function to
SC, which has been characterised by speciﬁc attention to
partnerships, relationships, networks, value creation and
value constellations [3]. Collaboration is known as a
‘‘silver bullet’’ in many areas of SCM [4, p. 314], which
illustrates the importance many ﬁrms place on it. Building
relationships between companies rather than working

in organisational performance improvement [5]. Regarding
the importance of intra- and inter-organisational relationships, various researchers have recognised that the link
between a ﬁrm and its SC members is one of the key
issues to ensure business success and competitive advantage [6, 7]. Companies that have developed their internal
business process with their suppliers and customers are in
a better position to produce and distribute their products at
a lower cost and satisfy service level requirements [8].
Hence, ﬁrms and their SC members working collaboratively by opening communication and sharing resources,
risks and rewards should enjoy mutual beneﬁts. For
instance, Hsu et al. [6] studied the impact of SCM practices on operations capability and ﬁrm performance. The
study illustrated the idea that SCM practices mediate the
impact of operations capability on organisational performance. Flynn et al. [9] indicated that SC integration
(supplier, internal and customer integration) is beneﬁcial
to ﬁrm performance. Previous studies have also provided
an illustration of the relationships between speciﬁc paradigms of internal practices [such as lean manufacturing
and enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems] and the
SC [10, 11]. However, there is a need for a comprehensive
study of other aspects that link SC partners in their
attempts to achieve competitive advantage and improve
organisational performance.
Regarding business process management (BPM) and
supply chain collaboration (SCC), prior research has suggested that both BPM and SCC are important for improving performance and competitiveness [11–14]. For
instance, Min et al. [13] developed a model of SCC to
demonstrate the relationships between the antecedents of
collaboration, collaboration itself and its consequences.
The antecedents included strategic intent, internal alignment, relationship orientation, relationship-speciﬁc investment, a free ﬂow of information and heightened
communication and formalisation. Collaboration was
shown to have a moderating effect between the antecedents
and the consequences (efﬁciency, effectiveness and profitability). Simatupang and Sridharan [14] highlighted that a
ﬁrm that focuses on BPM practices should be able to
support collaborative activities with its SC partners. There
is a positive relationship between internal SCM resources
and joint SCM resources, which in turn affect collaborative
SCM processes and SCM execution [12]. However, the
previous literature lacks empirical testing of the relationship between BPM and SCC, which are important for
leveraged performance. The link between these two aspects
needs to be identiﬁed to provide a better understanding of
how intra-organisational development regarding BPM
practice can help with collaborative activities and of the
beneﬁts that can, thereby, be achieved.

123



The early stage of our research empirically tested the
interrelationships between BPM, SCC, collaborative
advantage and organisational performance [15]. It provides
empirical evidence that there is a positive relationship
between the relationships under investigation. Hence, it
only indicated the results in terms of the signiﬁcance or
non-signiﬁcance of each hypothesis [15]. However, prior
research still lacks insights into the actual practices of BPM
and SCC, especially in the manufacturing sector in a
developing economy. Based on this research gap, we argue
that there is a need to capture instances of practitioners’
views of the relationships between BPM, SCC, collaborative advantage and organisational performance, and to
develop an understanding of the underlying factors guiding
these interrelationships. Therefore, this research aims to
provide a detailed understanding of the meanings, actions
and opinions of real-world practitioners in their speciﬁc
contextual situations and their experiences of the use of
BPM practices, collaboration with SC partners and beneﬁts
achieved in terms of collaborative advantage and organisational performance. More speciﬁcally, this research
focuses on the manufacturing sector in a developing
economy, namely Thailand, an aspect which has mainly
been neglected. The main research question that guided our
research can be identiﬁed as: ‘‘How do BPM and SCC
interrelate to drive collaborative advantage and organisational performance?’’. This can be broken down into three
research sub-questions: (1) ‘‘How does BPM help to
improve organisational performance?’’; (2) ‘‘How does
BPM help in collaborative activities?’’; and (3) ‘‘How do
contextual factors impact on the link between BPM and
SCC and the relationship beneﬁts?’’.
To answer these questions, a multi-case approach was
adopted using four medium and large companies from the
electronics and automotive industries in Thailand. Based
on earlier research, BPM represents intra-organisational
development, and we ascertained four elements of BPM,
namely strategic alignment, information technology (IT),
process orientation and improvement and people involvement [15]. We identiﬁed four elements of SCC, namely
information sharing and communication, sharing common
goals, joint activities and incentive alignment. These
important elements of BPM and SCC were selected based
on the most commonly used ones in previous research
(based on the number of citations from Harzing’s ‘‘Publish
or Perish’’ (23 July 2014). The beneﬁts were indicated in
terms of collaborative advantage and organisational performance, and a framework was developed to explain these
relationships. Next, a taxonomy was developed to identify
different types of internal development (BPM) and external
developments (SCC) and to illustrate how companies’
performance can be improved. The taxonomy can help SC
manage and improve their SC to achieve higher SC
performance.
To identify the role of BPM and SCC, and their beneﬁts
in terms of collaborative advantage and organisational
performance, terms such as business process management
(BPM), supply chain management, supply chain collaboration (SCC), collaborative advantage, organisational
performance and intra- and inter-organisation were used to
identify relevant keywords in research papers. The following section provides the relevant literature on BPM,
SCC and beneﬁts in terms of collaborative advantage and
organisational performance. The research methodology is
subsequently presented, followed by the case study analysis. Finally, the key research ﬁndings are summarised and
discussed, and contributions and conclusions are
highlighted.

2 Literature review
2.1 Business process management
BPM has been explained by various authors [16, 17].
According to Lindsay et al. [18], BPM strives to better
understand the key mechanisms of a business to improve
and in some cases to radically change the business performance by identifying opportunities for new business,
outsourcing, improving business efﬁciency and using
technology within different areas of the business to support
business processes. Van der Aalst et al. [17] suggested that
BPM was a ﬁeld of knowledge that covered the use of
various methods, techniques and technologies to support
business process changes, encouraging employees to
become more involved. More recently, Chang [16] deﬁned
BPM as a process-oriented organisational approach used to
design, analyse and improve business processes to effectively manage and improve organisational performance. In
summary, BPM utilises both incremental and radical
methodologies, focusing on processes, technology and the
involvement of people to ensure that customer satisfaction
is achieved in an effective way.
To capture the main elements of BPM, we deﬁne BPM
by covering the four main elements most commonly
highlighted by previous research [e.g. 16, 19]. The selection of these four elements was based on a number of
citations from Harzing’s (23 July 2014) ‘‘Publish or Perish’’. These four elements are strategic alignment, IT,
process orientation and improvement and people involvement. Strategic alignment refers to long-term goals, the
consideration of customer requirements and the internal
characteristics of organisations and involves developing
speciﬁc strategies and plans that can be implemented to

Page 3 of 20 6

maximise the value from process redesign and improvement [19]. Additionally, joint decision-making with SC
partners is necessary for intra-organisational operations and
the development of long-term plans. For instance, a ﬁrm
and its SC partners could make joint decisions about
demand forecasting and jointly establish and share common goals along a SC. IT is not developed to be used only
within organisational boundaries but can also involve
external IT interfaces and SC engagements. Process orientation is central to BPM and includes key elements such
as process view/documentation, value stream mapping,
process ownership and process measurement. BPM represents a convergence of previous process improvement
approaches, as it provides information and a process
management infrastructure for improvement [16, 19]. Both
top management and employee empowerment need to be
involved in BPM practices. Top management needs to be
committed and to communicate effectively, setting organisational values and developing a suitable management
style to improve organisational performance [20]. Additionally, empowering employees allows them to participate
actively and creatively in their work.
Organisational performance is described as a multidimensional concept. It refers to how well an organisation
fulﬁls both ﬁnancial and market-oriented goals [21].
Financial goals are measured by ﬁgures such as sales
growth, proﬁt margin on sales and return on investment
[5, 9]. Non-ﬁnancial performance is measured, for
example, by overall product quality, overall competitive
position, overall customer service levels, core competences and capabilities [5, 9]. Non-ﬁnancial performance
measures can help shift attention away from short-term
ﬁnancial goals towards medium- and long-term goals
[22].
Several studies have revealed that BPM has a positive
impact on organisational performance [23–26]. However,
there is limited research on the link between some attributes of BPM and organisational performance. A number
of studies [19, 24] focused on the ‘‘process’’ concepts of
BPM, its attributes and the links between attributes and
beneﬁts such as organisational performance and customer
satisfaction. Smart et al. [19] empirically validated a BPM
framework by considering the context of processes to
characterise BPM. They identiﬁed ﬁve main dimensions of
BPM, namely process strategy, process architecture, process measurement, process ownership and process
improvement. Maddern et al. [24] examined the impact of
BPM on service quality and customer satisfaction and
highlighted that BPM is a critical factor in driving customer satisfaction. The relationship between process orientation and organisational performance was studied by
Skirinjar et al. [26]. Their results showed that business
process orientation leads to an improvement in both

studies on BPM have mostly focused on some speciﬁc
attributes of BPM. Hence, there is a lack of BPM research
that includes all the main attributes covering the entire
scope of BPM. Most studies of BPM have typically been
narrowly deﬁned and have focused on aspects within the
organisational boundaries rather than investigating the
link between BPM and
the inter-organisational
relationship.
2.2 Supply chain collaboration
Several researchers have indicated an increasing interest
in SCC [e.g. 27, 28]. SCC occurs when two or more ﬁrms
in a SC work closely together in planning and delivering
products to end customers to optimise proﬁts for the SC
members and gain mutual beneﬁts [5]. It is necessary to
develop closer relationships, integrating processes and
sharing information with customers and suppliers.
According to Barratt [29, p. 33], ‘‘Internal collaboration
must be married with external collaboration’’. Thus, ﬁrms
need to collaborate in order to gain access to combinations
of resources or improved capabilities that allow them to
achieve collaborative advantage and higher performance.
Collaborative advantage refers to strategic beneﬁts
achieved over competitors in the marketplace which could
not have been achieved without working through the SC
partnership [5, 30]. Therefore, these beneﬁts achieved
should be more than those achievable by a ﬁrm working in
isolation. Synthesising the literature, the important elements of SCC that have been commonly used in previous
research [based on a number of citations from Harzing’s
(23 July 2014) ‘‘Publish or Perish’’] are information
sharing and communication, sharing common goals, joint
activities and incentive alignment [5, 28, 31]. Information
sharing and communication are described as important for
effective collaboration to achieve a greater shared understanding within the SC partnership; therefore, an environment of innovative thinking will be encouraged and
supported [5, 13, 29, 31]. Joint activities refer to joint
decision-making and the sharing of resources between SC
partners. A ﬁrm and its SC partners jointly performing
activities could result in the development of a deeper
understanding between partners, leading to more efﬁcient
communication in a virtuous cycle. Sharing common goals
is important for good relationships between ﬁrms, as they
work for mutual beneﬁts. Incentive alignment refers to the
degree to which participating SC members share costs,
risks and beneﬁts [14]. It provides a system for repositioning the beneﬁts and problems that are encountered
when process changes occur within the SC.
A positive association between SC performance and
organisational performance has been supported by previous

123



studies [6, 9, 21, 32], so achieving SC performance is
critical for improving ﬁrm performance. Additionally,
much of the previous SCM research asserts that ﬁrms that
work collaboratively with their SC partners can improve
their organisational performance [5, 32–34]. SCC assists
ﬁrm performance in reducing ambiguity and identifying
priorities which can speed up business operations, save
time and ensure that the business runs smoothly. Research
by Vereecke and Muylle [33] indicated that SCC had an
impact on performance improvement (in terms of delivery,
cost, quality, ﬂexibility, lead time and time to market).
Thus, SC members who provide higher levels of collaboration practices (e.g. information sharing, joint activities
and decision-making) were able to achieve better operational performance and innovative activities [14, 32, 34].
Also, SCC can be utilised for transferring knowledge and
new technological skills across the ﬁrms, which should
result in better opportunities for enhancing their objectives
[5] and can lead to improved performance and competitive
advantage over time. Additionally, there is evidence suggesting that SC relationships are dependent on organisational, competitive and relationship-speciﬁc attributes [35–
38]. The ﬁndings of Sila [35] showed that ﬁrm size did not
have a great effect on the implementation of total quality
management (TQM) practices. The empirical results produced by Hou [37] also showed ﬁrm size to have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on ﬁrm performance. Lavastre et al. [38]
indicated that longer relationships between ﬁrms and their
SC partners should result in greater mutual beneﬁts, such as
the sharing of mutual and private knowledge, and greater
control over important processes through collaboration and
joint learning. However, there is also a lack of empirical
research elaborating on the impact of context-dependent
factors on the interrelationship between the competitive
and performance linkages, on both the individual operation
and the SC.
2.3 Intra- and inter-organisational management
practice
Unlike previous research, which has tended to focus on
BPM and SCC separately [6, 11], this study summarises the
link between BPM and SCC, as presented in Fig. 1. A
framework has been developed based on a review of the
relevant literature to identify the link between intra- and
inter-ﬁrm management practices. In terms of internal collaboration, as represented by BPM, this ultimately incorporates four main attributes: strategic alignment, IT,
process orientation and improvement and people
involvement.
SCC emphasises external collaboration, and this incorporates four main attributes, namely information sharing

Fig. 1 Relationship between
BPM, SCC and the performance
outcomes

Inter-organisation

Intra-organisation
•
•
•
•

•

Strategic alignment
Information technology
Process orientation and
improvement
People involvement

•
•
•

BPM

Information sharing and
communication
Joint activities
Sharing common goals
Incentive alignment

SCC
Collaborative
Advantage

Organisational
Performance

or customers, so the taxonomy consists of two dimensions:
the level of internal development, represented by BPM, and
the level of external development, as inﬂuenced by SCC. A
combination of these two dimensions classiﬁes four types
of relationships, and this interaction results in different
levels of performance outcomes.
The ‘‘Star performance’’ quadrant A represents the state
where all ﬁrms within a SC emphasise high internal
development (high BPM), as well as a high level of collaboration with their SC partners (high SCC). This state is
achieved, typically, in an effort to effectively differentiate
themselves from their rivals and/or reduce costs along the
SC. High internal and external development can be
achieved by integrating processes and sharing information
with customers and suppliers. Companies collectively

A

Weakest link

Star performance

(Poor performance in a good supply
chain)

(Highly integrated,
achieving supply chain performance)

D

B

Clunker

High

C

Low

Fig. 2 Different styles of
internal and external
collaboration

External development: Supply Chain
Collaboration

and incentive alignment. Effective internal development
and working collaboratively with SC partners should result
in superior performance, at both ﬁrm and SC levels. Firms
that practice BPM and also collaborate with SC partners
develop collaborative advantage, which cannot be achieved
when they work individually. Collaborative advantage, in
turn, leads to improved internal capabilities and organisational performance. Therefore, the presence of a virtuous
cycle is suggested.
Consequently, a taxonomy was developed (see Fig. 2) to
map the links between BPM and SCC and beneﬁts
achieved in terms of SC performance, which can lead to
improved ﬁrm performance. Of the different SC levels, this
research focuses exclusively on direct SC relationships in
which a ﬁrm is working collaboratively with its suppliers

Supply Chain
Performance

Silo

(Functional organisation)

(Good performance in a bad supply
chain)

Low

High

Internal development: Business Process Management

holistic SCM. Therefore, ﬁrms in this quadrant need to
closely monitor the effectiveness of internal and external
development in order to justify relevant efforts and maintain their relative competitive positions [14, 29].
The ‘‘Silo’’ situation B represents the state of a ﬁrm
within a SC that demonstrates high BPM and low SCC. A
high level of internal development is achieved when a ﬁrm
completes integrated tasks across various internal boundaries, such as purchasing, manufacturing, logistics and
marketing. This position can be achieved by using
advanced technology and/or by using process improvement
programmes such as TQM, just-in-time (JIT) and ERP to
optimise the silo (i.e. the individual company) rather than
optimising the whole SC. Nowadays, a narrow view that
only focuses within an organisation is not considered
adequate [39]. A ﬁrm that pays little attention to working
collaboratively with its SC partners and does not align its
business strategy to the SC strategy may experience a loss
of opportunity to improve its performance [40]. Therefore,
ﬁrms in this position need to collaborate with their SC
members to achieve effective responses to customers’
needs [41] by jointly forecasting and planning, otherwise,
they may lose their relative competitive positions and fail
to achieve the star performance.
The ‘‘Weakest link’’ quadrant C represents the state of a
ﬁrm within a SC that emphasises low BPM and high SCC.
In many cases, close relationships between a ﬁrm and its
SC partners exist, but often the ﬁrm is resistant to open
information sharing [42]. Incomplete or insufﬁcient information sharing to support collaboration will probably
reduce the opportunity for a high level of collaboration
between a ﬁrm and its SC partners [42]. Additionally, this
position can occur when a ﬁrm perceives some costs in
contending with their partners’ threats [14]. Firms in this
position need to improve their internal capabilities such as
technology and innovation development and the use of
process improvement techniques in order to collaborate
with SC members effectively and to achieve better performance. Otherwise, their future membership in the SC
may be in jeopardy.
The ‘‘Clunker’’ quadrant D represents the state of a ﬁrm
within a SC emphasising low BPM and low SCC. Here,
companies exhibit low levels of internal and external
integration, which are typical of a SC containing many
functional organisations. It can be presented as a ‘‘traditional supply chain’’ [43, p. 172], whereby each level in the
SC issues production orders and replaces stock without
considering the situations of suppliers and customers in the
SC. Therefore, the SC exhibits low formal collaboration
between ﬁrms. Overall, ﬁrms in this position may lack a
common SC perspective in terms of internal and external
development.

123



In relation to the previous, resource-based view (RBV)
and relational view (RV) are appropriate for the theoretical
explanation of the relationships between intra- and interﬁrms and the outcomes that can be achieved from the
relationships investigated [e.g. 5, 11, 27, 44]. RBV is
concerned with how a single ﬁrm can generate competitive
advantage results based upon resources and capabilities
that are owned and controlled within a ﬁrm [45]. It is
focused on the internal organisation, and it is a complement
to both the traditional emphasis of strategy on industry
structure and strategic positioning as keys to competitive
advantage [46]. RBV can be used to provide a theoretical
background for evaluating types of internal capabilities that
offer a competitive advantage which can lead to
improvements in ﬁnancial performance [47]. Ultimately,
BPM resources (e.g. the use of IT, process orientation and
improvement, people involvement and employee skills
development) may form unique capabilities for competitive
advantage. Hence, these resources can be utilised to contribute to the ﬁrm’s success in current and future markets.
RV focuses on the dyad/network rather than on individual ﬁrms [11, 44, 45, 48]. Thus, RV explains the role of
collaboration as a way to develop complementary capabilities in order to achieve competitive advantage [11, 44].
RV indicates that organisational capabilities can be
developed by spanning the boundary of ﬁrms through the
combination of resources from different ﬁrms in the SC.
SCC and collaborative advantage are based on the RV
theory, which takes into account the dyad/network, instead
of individual ﬁrms, as the unit of analysis. Thus, it provides
the mechanism of joint value creation, such as inter-ﬁrm
rent generation [11, 27].

3 Methodology
This study employed the case study approach as a followup to the large-scale survey [49, 50] to gain a deeper
understanding of the empirical results. Regarding the case
study selection, a multiple case design was adopted to
further elaborate on the quantitative ﬁndings. This design is
derived from diverse types of conditions and aims to have
sub-groups of cases covering each type [49]. The case
selection process was based on the criteria of size and
industry: one medium- and one large-sized ﬁrm from the
automotive and electronics industries. The size distinction
was based on the ofﬁcial Thai deﬁnition: a medium-sized
ﬁrm having 51–200 employees and a large-sized ﬁrm
employing more than 200 people (The Ministry of Industry
Thailand, 2013). This process allowed for some level of
triangulation above the company level [49]. Overall, 15
ﬁrms meeting these criteria, which contributed to the ﬁrst

Electronics
Automotive

Industry Type

and by phone. Finally, four cases were selected to participate in the interview process. The selected paradigmatic
case studies allowed for a comparison of similarities and
differences between ﬁrm size, industry type, relationship
direction and relationship length. The identities of the
companies have to remain anonymous because of conﬁdentiality agreements, and they are referred to as follows
(see also Fig. 3): ELC (a large electronics company), ALC
(a large automotive company), EMC (a medium-sized
electronics company) and AMC (a medium-sized automotive company). Appendix 1 provides the backgrounds of
the participating companies.
An interview protocol was developed, based on the
results of the large-scale survey, to ensure that all issues
required were addressed. The interview questions were
organised in a logical sequential order, with wording that
was not too direct and too leading, resulting in clear and
precise questions to ensure that the interview questions
were effective [51]. Appendix 2 elaborates on the development of the interview questions. In relation to subquestion 1 (see Sect. 1), the interview questions asked
participants to describe BPM and its practices, how BPM
has helped to improve organisational performance, relationship difﬁculties and the solutions for dealing with
challenges. In relation to our second research sub-question
(see Sect. 1), the interview questions asked how BPM has
helped collaborative activities, whether the ﬁrms had
experienced relationship difﬁculties and what solutions have been implemented to address such challenges.
In relation to our third research sub-question, the interview
questions focused on relationship characteristics (i.e. the
closeness of the relationship, the reasons for engaging the
company in collaboration, relationship difﬁculties, solutions to the challenges and relationship length), as well as
beneﬁts that the company has achieved from working
collaboratively with its SC partner, challenges to achieving
collaborative advantage and solutions implemented to
address such challenges. Additionally, questions covered
how collaborative advantage has helped to improve
organisational performance and what would happen if a
company operated without a collaborative relationship.

Large

Medium

Firm Size

Fig. 3 Case study selection

After careful development, the interview protocol was
translated into Thai. Then, the interview protocol was pilottested to assess whether it was workable and to identify any
problems that might occur during the subsequent interview
process.
Semi-structured interviews were employed between
February and mid-March 2014. From each of the four
companies, the member of personnel who had completed
the large-scale survey was contacted. Interview questions
were sent to the practitioners 3–5 days in advance to allow
them time to prepare their answers to the interview questions. The average duration of each interview was one and
a half hours. All interviews were digitally recorded, and
ﬁeld notes were also used to collect information during the
interview. The voice recordings of the interviews were later
transcribed into Thai and then translated into English. A
case study database was developed and used for visualising
the data and for developing tables and matrices containing
various views used in the case study analysis.
The case study data analysis followed ‘‘the data analysis
spiral’’ suggested by Creswell [52, p. 150]. The processes
move along with the analytical circles in a nonlinear
approach, touching on several facets of analysis and circling
around and around [52]. The analysis procedures include: (1)
data managing; (2) reading and memoing; (3) describing,
classifying and interpreting; and (4) representing and visualising. The ﬁrst task in the spiral begins with organising the
data into an assessable format (‘‘data managing’’ procedure).
Then, further notes were made to record the key ideas and
concepts during the reading of the interview database
(‘‘reading and memoing’’ procedure). After scanning
through the database, ‘‘conceptually clustered matrices’’
were developed (‘‘classiﬁcation’’ procedure). The development of conceptually clustered matrices is the most useful
technique when: (1) a clear concept or theme has emerged
from the initial analysis or (2) during early analysis, and after
reading through the transcripts, the researcher ﬁnds that
participants have given very similar or vastly different
responses to questions and that unexpected variables, concepts, and themes have emerged [53]. In addition, rows and
columns were created to bring research sub-topics, concepts
and/or themes together, developing a summary documentation and analysis [53]. The conceptually clustered matrix
ensures all the data ﬁt into a reasonable format. It also presents a set of themes with information of each case, which
lends itself to cross-case analysis for multiple case studies
[53]. In this study, the main themes developed based on the
research questions were: (1) the link between BPM and
organisational performance; (2) the link between BPM and
SCC; and (3) the contextual factors and beneﬁts achieved
from working collaboratively with SC partners. Additionally, some sub-themes (e.g. BPM regarding activities and
solutions for short-term relationships) were identiﬁed at an

similar explanations. The transcripts from the interviews
were entered into the matrix based on speciﬁc themes and
sub-themes that had been identiﬁed. The case study database
is developed and an information summary of each case is
shown in a table format (‘‘representing’’ procedure, the ﬁnal
phase of the spiral) (see Appendix 3). This table displays all
of the relevant responses of all cases and allows initial
comparisons for the cross-case analysis.

4 Case study analysis
4.1 A summary of the within-case analysis
A summary of the within-case analysis is shown in
Appendix 3. The table covers the link between BPM and
organisational performance, the link between BPM and
SCC, the beneﬁts of working collaboratively with SC
partners and organisational performance. Additionally, the
table includes the contextual factors of relationship closeness and relationship length for each case company. A
summary of the four cases aided the cross-case analysis
that is presented in the following sections.
4.2 Cross-case analysis
4.2.1 The link between BPM and organisational
performance
We asked each respondent to describe BPM from a practitioner’s perspective. All cases provided four common
characteristics of BPM practices, namely long-term planning, IT, process improvement, and top management support and employee involvement. Long-term planning needs
to be based on customer requirements and should cover
aspects of production planning, promotional events and
supplier development. This plan has to be jointly developed
with the SC partners. For instance, the Production Manager
from ALC suggested that:
The company has set a long-term policy, which is for
three years. However, at the end of each year there is
a review of the situation, and if necessary there is a
change to or an improvement to the plan. The company has jointly developed production forecasts with
its suppliers.
These long-term plans have to be integrated into the
companies’ operational processes. Additionally, the case
study results indicated that joint decision-making with SC
partners is necessary for intra-organisational operations and

123



the development of long-term plans, so that the latter are
aligned with those of their SC partners. IT is important to
accomplish the business plan and to improve operational
processes, and IT is used to share information both within
an organisation, from top management to employees, and
with their SC partners. For instance, it was suggested that:
The use of IT is very important to accomplish this
plan, and information sharing includes both top
management and all the employees. (ELC)
All cases underlined the importance of IT being developed not only to be used within organisational boundaries
but to also involve external IT interfaces and SC engagement. This allows information to be shared between different departments within the company to improve its products
and processes, meaning that necessary information can be
shared easily with SC partners, such as speciﬁc product
requirements and demand forecasting. The four cases have
used various process improvement techniques such as TQM,
Lean Manufacturing and Kaizen to improve their business
processes. The managers pointed out that their process
improvement techniques were often the same techniques as
their SC partners (ALC, EMC and AMC). The use of process improvement techniques also leads to more employee
involvement; for instance, it was suggested that the use of
Kaizen provides opportunities for employees to contribute
any suggestions they may have for work improvements
(ELC). The effective use of process improvement techniques
is vital for optimising processes and maximising value for an
organisation. Top management support is very important for
successful BPM practices, as participants in all four cases
suggested that their BPM practices were fully supported and
led by top management. Additionally, good relationships
between top management and employees have been developed. For instance, one company provides a ‘‘President box’’
for employees to contact the president of the company
directly (ELC). Additionally, employees are involved in
decision-making; it was reported that:
Top management has to set policies that should lead
to improvements. However, before the policies have
been set, there is an internal meeting, including
managers of each department, where they discuss any
problems. Also, employees can give any suggestions
they have to their manager. (ALC)
We have sent employees to train in Japan to learn
new technology and innovations, so they can come
back to improve our products. (ELC)
both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial. In terms of ﬁnancial
performance, all four cases emphasised that sales growth
and cost reduction were the most important dimensions.
Sales growth and cost reduction referred to the improvement in production processes, the policies adopted to
reduce costs and the reduction in waste. It was explained
that:
In terms of cost reductions, the company has set
targets for cost reductions, improved sales growth
and improved product quality in each department.
(EMC)
Regarding non-ﬁnancial performance, two cases focused
on overall competitive position and core competences
(ELC and ALC). For all cases, quality is an important
issue. The four companies have continued to carry out
quality improvement activities such as recording problems
and the improvements and preventive measures in response
to quality non-conformity and the monitoring of progress.
Waste reduction was also important for all cases.
4.2.2 The link between BPM and SCC
From our investigation, BPM practices help various collaborative activities, which can be divided into four types:
information sharing and communication, joint activities,
sharing common goals and sharing costs, risks and beneﬁts.
The analysis provided evidence of the importance of information sharing and communication within a ﬁrm and
with SC partners. For instance, an ERP system is used to
share information within the company and with its SC
partners for a long period of time ([20 years for ELC and
5–10 years for ALC). Technical and non-technical information is also shared with suppliers (ALC). In addition, all
four managers explained that relevant knowledge regarding
collaborative activities and process improvements is shared
between a ﬁrm, suppliers and customers. For instance,
knowledge regarding process improvement techniques and
knowledge that can be used to reduce costs in the production process are being shared. The factory manager
from AMC indicated that:
A customer sent a team to our company so they could
share their knowledge about some process improvement techniques, such as the TPS […], so now the
ﬁrm and our customers are using the same techniques
to mutually improve our businesses.
Also, all cases indicated the importance of open and clear
communication, both formal and informal, with suppliers
and customers. For example, informal communication is
used (ELC and ALC) in crucial situations when a manager is
not in the ofﬁce to sign an ofﬁcial document. Staff can make

Page 9 of 20 6

telephone calls to order raw materials before using the more
formal method of sending ofﬁcial documents (ELC). A
specialised voice and messaging application is used for
informal communication to update information between a
ﬁrm and its suppliers (ALC). All cases have some form of
joint activities with their SC partners, for instance, jointly
planning demand forecasts, resolving forecast errors and
jointly working out solutions to problems within a SC.
Regular meetings with suppliers and customers are held to
jointly plan and jointly solve problems and to update any
changes and improvements in terms of production planning,
process improvement and technology. For instance, case
ALC has set up a team to work closely with its suppliers to
improve and develop the relationships and grow together. It
is important for working collaboratively with SC partners
that mutual beneﬁts are highlighted (all cases). The Production Manager in case AMC stated that:
If there is no agreement about goals and objectives
from working collaboratively, this could create
problems rather than beneﬁts within the chain.
All of the managers also explained that a ﬁrm, suppliers
and customers need to develop and grow together. A ﬁrm
has also co-developed systems by setting and sharing key
performance indicators (KPIs) together with its suppliers
(ALC). Taking into account the joint activities and the
sharing of mutual beneﬁts between a ﬁrm and its SC
partners, the case studies results show that all cases have
some form of sharing cost, risk and beneﬁt with their SC
partners. For instance, ALC has systems which have been
co-developed through jointly setting and sharing KPIs. The
production plan also requires SC partners to be involved in
terms of demand forecasts and promotions. The SC Manager made this point:
This production plan also needs the SC partners to be
involved. There has to be a sharing of costs, risks and
beneﬁts because, if not, then it is not a concept of
SCC. (ELC)
The four cases illustrate that an intra-organisational
focus (on BPM) is a prerequisite for inter-organisational
activities (SCC). The managers in all cases suggested that
working collaboratively with SC partners would be paid
back to the company in terms of beneﬁts along the SC, and
this can help to improve the ﬁrm performance. The Production Manager from case ALC suggested that:
To collaborate successfully with SC partners, ﬁrstly,
we have to improve and develop both human
resources and technology. Secondly, we have to drive
the growth of our suppliers at the same time as our
company. Thirdly, we have to follow the ‘‘voice of
the customer’’ as much as we can, in order to meet


customer requirements and to achieve customer satisfaction. Finally, these three will be paid back to the
company in terms of mutual beneﬁts along the SC,
and this must help to improve our ﬁrm’s
performance.

relationship closeness, contributing to our cross-case
analysis. Regarding collaborative advantage, the initial
terms from the case studies are time to market, quality and
meeting customers’ requirements. The Production Manager
in ALC explained that:

Overall, the case studies offer detailed explanations with
regard to how the ﬁrms collaborate with their SC partners
in terms of information sharing and communication, joint
activities, sharing common goals and the sharing of costs,
risks and beneﬁts.

Time to market and quality are essential because we
produce automotive parts, which means that if the car
is sold, then we will automatically hit the market. The
others are product variety, meeting customers’
requirements, using technology and innovation
effectively and sharing system controls with customers, which we can use in our own company.

4.2.3 Contextual factors and the relationship beneﬁts
The interview participants explained the mutually beneﬁcial outcomes of BPM practices and working jointly with
SC partners in terms of collaborative advantage and
organisational performance, as summarised in Fig. 4. This
ﬁgure highlights similarities and differences between the
contextual factors of ﬁrm size, industry type and

The results from the case studies also illustrate that
working collaboratively with SC partners improves both
ﬁnancial (cost reduction, sales growth and return on
investment) and non-ﬁnancial (quality, overall competitive
positions and waste reduction) organisational performance
(all cases). For instance, the SC Manager in ELC indicated
that:

Firm size
Large

Medium

Collaborative Advantage
Time to market
Quality
Customer satisfaction
Meet customer requirements

Supplier loyalty
Product innovation

Quality
Meet customer requirements
Customer satisfaction
Time to market

Collaborative Advantage

Electronics

ELC

Financial
Cost reduction
Sales growth
Return on
investment

Industry type

Non-Financial
Overall competitive
position
Core competences
Quality
Employee development

Financial
Cost reduction
Sales growth

Non-Financial
Quality
Waste reduction
Improved production
process
Employee development

ALC

Automotive

AMC
Financial
Cost reduction
Sales growth
Return on
investment

Non-Financial
Overall competitive
position
Employee development
Improved production
process
Quality, Waste reduction

Time to market
Quality
Product variety
Meet customer requirements
The effective use of technology and innovation
Sharing systems controls with customers and suppliers
Collaborative Advantage

Suppliers
Fig. 4 Beneﬁts from working collaboratively with SC partner

123

EMC

Financial
Cost reduction
Sales growth

Non-Financial
Quality
Waste reduction
Improved production
process
Employee development

Meet customer requirements
Product variety
Quality
Time to market
Collaborative Advantage

customers and suppliers. The collaboration has
resulted in the suppliers knowing that they will
receive orders from the company, as long as they
maintain certain standards, and everyone beneﬁts
from working collaboratively.
Therefore, ﬁrms that focus on their internal development
by practising BPM and that collaborate with their SC
partners can achieve a collaborative advantage, which in
turn leads to an improvement in organisational performance, both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial. The results also
indicate that large ﬁrms work more closely with suppliers,
whereas the medium ﬁrms work more closely with their
customers. The results show that regardless of ﬁrm size,
similar collaborative advantage can be achieved. However,
ﬁrm size is important when the priorities of collaborative
advantage are taken into account. The two large ﬁrms focus
more on time to market and quality, while the mediumsized ﬁrms concentrate more on quality and meeting customer requirements. The results indicate that product
innovation and the effective use of technology are the main
focus in the large ﬁrms and that they are actively improving
their technology and their employees’ skills to facilitate
these outcomes. All four companies suggested that the
relationship direction is usually based on long-term
partnerships.
Additionally, whether the company is working closely
with suppliers or customers, both need to work jointly; for
example, it is important to have joint meetings to develop
policy, joint decision-making, joint problem-solving, joint
planning of demand forecasts and joint efforts to reduce
lead time with suppliers. In relation to the importance of
close relationships with SC partners, two practitioners
explained that:
The use of technology and joint activities such as
forecasting with suppliers is vital. Also, the company
visits suppliers and attempts to solve production
problems together. (ELC)
The activities with close suppliers cover developing
policy and technology together, sharing information
and sharing knowledge such as product design. (ALC)
As regards industry type, the results show that the electronics and automotive industries are similar in the way they
collaborate with SC partners. Both electronics and automotive industries provide similar results in terms of beneﬁts
achieved from working collaboratively with their SC partners. However, the two automotive companies focus more on
improving product variety. It was explained that:
We need to develop technology to support the new
automotive models […]. The company sees

Page 11 of 20 6

innovation as a way to improve our products so that
they have a longer life […] we have to improve our
employees’ skills so that we can use new skills to
improve current products and to provide innovative
products. (ALC)
Regarding the relationship length, the results show that
the four cases have been working collaboratively with their
closest SC partners since they started the business, over a
period of between 10 and 22 years. All participants suggested that long-term relationships incurred fewer problems,
provided
more
ﬂexibility
and
allowed
communication to be both formal and informal. In contrast,
short-term relationships tend to be more complex, as they
are more difﬁcult in terms of price negotiations and more
time-consuming in terms of communication. For example,
the Production Manager in AMC stated that:
Communication is easier than when it’s a short-term
relationship […] we rely on each other more.
Dealing with short-term relationships is more complex.
Although the results reveal that short-term SC relationships
can create difﬁculties, they do not have an impact on the
beneﬁts achieved from collaborative advantage and
organisational performance. The managers highlighted
that:
Actually, the length of the relationship does not
cause any problems in terms of beneﬁts, but shortterm relationships make the collaboration process
more complicated than long-term relationships do.
(ALC)
Relationship length has not caused any problems
because we are continuously improving our systems.
However, it is not about relationship length, it is more
about how to improve our business so that we are
able to compete in the market better than our competitors. (EMC)

5 Key ﬁndings and discussion
Based on a speciﬁc context of Thailand manufacturing
sectors, the results from the case studies have illustrated the
key common characteristics of BPM, which are long-term
planning, IT, process improvement, top management support and employee involvement. These common characteristics can assist a ﬁrm in improving organisational
performance, both ﬁnancial (e.g. sales growth and cost
reduction) and non-ﬁnancial (e.g. quality and waste
reduction). This ﬁnding is in line with the vast majority of
previous research in which a positive relationship between


The case studies provided a greater understanding of
how ﬁrms of different sizes, from both the electronics and
automotive industries, have chosen to work closely with
their SC partners in different ways. The larger ﬁrms are
working more closely with their suppliers, while the closest
relationships the medium-sized ﬁrms have are with their
customers. The closest partnerships are characterised as
being of a long-term nature, with ﬁrms working closely
together in various activities such as planning, decisionmaking and sharing knowledge over time. As regards the
length of the relationships, long-term relationships between
a ﬁrm and its SC partners result in fewer problems,
enhanced ﬂexibility and open communication. This is in
line with previous research [36, 38]. Nevertheless, the case
study analysis shows that short-term relationships can be
difﬁcult (e.g. in terms of communication and the setting of
policies and conditions) but do not have any impact on the
beneﬁts achieved in terms of collaborative advantage and
organisational performance. Hence, collaborative relationships, whether long or short term, result in mutual beneﬁts
and improved organisational performance.
Based on the above results, the practices of these four
companies can be categorised into different scenarios in
relation to the link between BPM and SCC. Employing the
discussion in Sect. 2.3, we can now map all case studies
according to the level of internal and external development,
as presented in Fig. 5. The companies in the cases ELC and
ALC can be identiﬁed as ‘‘Silo’’ cases because they
have highly integrated tasks across different departments
within their organisations. Additionally, advanced technology has been used to support their internal and external
developments.

High

External development: SCC

Weakest link
-

Case EMC, AMC
Focus on cost reduction and
sales growth.
Low level of technology
development and process
improvement techniques.

Star performance
(Highly integrated, achieving supply
chain performance)

Clunker

Silo

(Functional organisation)

- Case ELC, ALC
- Focus on cost reduction, sales
growth and competitive position.
- High level of internal
development, using advanced
technology, process
improvement programmes to
optimise the individual
companies.

Low

BPM and organisational performance has also been found
[15, 23–26]. The results from the case studies offered
explanations about how the ﬁrms practice BPM, as well as
about the importance of BPM practices in improving
organisational performance (see Sect. 4.2.1). This supports
the RBV theory [45–47], according to which resources and
practices that are developed within a company can contribute to a ﬁrm’s performance and are difﬁcult for competitors to imitate.
It has been established that an intra-organisational focus
(BPM) is essential for inter-organisational activities (SCC)
in terms of information sharing and communication, joint
activities, sharing common goals and sharing costs, risks
and beneﬁts. A ﬁrm and its SC partners need to develop
and grow together and work to enhance their mutual beneﬁts. The results reveal that BPM not only improves
organisational performance directly, but also assists with
collaborative activities that in turn help to improve internal
capabilities. This ﬁnding is, to some extent, consistent with
[6, 9, 13, 15], which highlight the importance of intra- and
inter-organisational development for business success and
competitive advantage. The results of this study make it
more explicit in terms of how intra-organisational focus
(BPM) is essential for inter-organisational activities (SCC)
(see Sect. 4.2.2). The results support the RV theory [11,
44], according to which ﬁrms need to consider leveraging
their resources with their SC partners in order to gain more
competitive advantage. Firms working together with their
SC partners to share their knowledge and skills and combine their resources can create greater capabilities than
ﬁrms working individually.
The case studies illustrate that the beneﬁts of working
with SC partners are related to collaborative advantage and
organisational performance. Also, they illustrate the practices and approaches taken across diverse ﬁrm sizes and
industry types and the effects of the closeness and length of
relationships. Firms of different sizes can contribute proportional ﬁnancial and managerial resources to support
their collaborative efforts; however, the ﬁrms were found
to develop appropriate strategies with their SC partners
based on common goals and the sharing of their, occasionally limited, resources in an effective way, thus
achieving collaborative advantage and improving organisational performance. Additionally, they were found to
apply different business strategies. For example, the medium-sized ﬁrms tended to focus only on cost reduction and
sales growth, whereas the large ﬁrms additionally looked at
their overall competitive position. This ﬁnding is, to some
extent, consistent with [15, 35, 37]. Our research develops
explicit knowledge linking BPM, SCC and the beneﬁts in
medium ﬁrms compared to large ﬁrms (see Sect. 4.2.3).



Low

High

Internal development: BPM
and innovation, as these have been used to improve quality,
safety and production processes. Also, ERP systems have
been used by these two companies for a long period of time
([20 years for ELC and 5–10 years for ALC) to share
information both within the companies and with their SC
partners. Various process improvement techniques have
been used to improve their business processes, such as
TQM, BPR, Lean, Six Sigma and Kaizen. The two companies have focused on cost reduction, sales growth and
their competitive positions and consider the use of technology to be very important for new product development.
Therefore, working closely with their SC partners to share
knowledge, jointly develop and share KPIs, and align
company strategies with SC strategies should result in a
high level of integration and better SC performance.
The other two companies (EMC and AMC) employ
process improvement techniques but have used them for
less time than the large ﬁrms (‘‘weakest link’’ cases). For
instance, they have used TQM, Lean and Kaizen for
between 5 and 10 years. Also, there is less focus on
improving production technology (compared with the two
large ﬁrms). For example, they provide their employees
with initial basic skills, but tend not to provide them with
more advanced knowledge of new technology. Additionally, these two companies are mainly focused on cost
reduction and sales growth rather than improving their
competitive position. Therefore, the internal capabilities of
these two case companies could be developed through the
improvement in their technology, innovation development
and the use of process improvement techniques that would
help them collaborate with their SC partners more effectively. This should result in enhanced performance;
otherwise, they might not be able to continue to justify
their membership in the SC to the other members.

6 Contribution
6.1 Theoretical contributions
From a theoretical perspective, RBV and RV are foundations that expand understanding of the links between BPM,
SCC, collaborative advantage and organisational performance. This study’s results provided support for both RBV
and RV theories. Drawing upon RV, it was proposed that
ﬁrms which collaborate with SC partners will achieve more
beneﬁts than when they work in isolation. Indeed, previous
research has suggested that both BPM and SCC are vital
for performance improvements and competitiveness [11–
14, 31]. However, these two approaches have been studied

Page 13 of 20 6

separately. The main contribution of this paper is to provide a deeper understanding of ‘‘How’’ and ‘‘Why’’ BPM
and SCC interrelate to drive collaborative advantage and
organisational performance. Also, the results from the case
studies provide in-depth views that BPM contributes
directly and indirectly to the improvement in organisational
performance. A matrix is proposed based on a literature
review to capture the different situations exhibited within
SCs, considering internal and external development, and
different types of relationships between BPM and SCC are
identiﬁed within the conﬁgurations being distinguished.
The study added to the limited empirical research concerning the impacts of contextual factors on the interrelationships between the competitive and performance
linkages, at both internal company and SC levels. A
number of previous studies have indicated the importance
of contextual factors [12, 15, 35–39]. However, there is a
lack of empirical research describing the impact of contextual factors on the links between BPM and SCC. In
addition, this is the ﬁrst research of its kind that has studied
the links between BPM, SCC and the beneﬁts which can be
achieved from these links within the context of Thailand’s
manufacturing industries. A detailed understanding of each
contextual factor in terms of ﬁrm size, industry type,
closeness and relationship length was gained. Also, the
important manufacturing industries, namely the automotive
and electronics industries in a developing economy, Thailand, were addressed in this study. Arguably, this study is
vital for the future growth and development of Thailand’s
manufacturing industries, and with some adjustments, it
could be used in other countries whose manufacturing
sectors share similar characteristics with Thailand.
6.2 Practical contributions
Based on the research ﬁndings, there are practical implications relevant to organisations wishing to extract further
value from working collaboratively with their SC partners
and from their BPM practices. Firstly, this research can
assist management to be conscious of the importance of the
intra- and inter-organisational development, given that the
premise of BPM is to improve organisational performance
and to support collaborative activities. Therefore, management should take into consideration that the internal
development based on BPM practices does not only
improve organisational performance, but also that BPM is
crucial for collaborative activities between a ﬁrm and its
SC partners. Similarly, this study can expand management’s awareness about the multi-dimensional nature of
BPM, and the particular importance of its four key elements, namely strategic alignment, IT, process orientation

managers should consider collaborating by sharing information (and communicating), performing joint activities
and sharing common goals, costs, risks and beneﬁts, which
will enable ﬁrms to effectively leverage their capabilities
and to accomplish the desired beneﬁts.
Secondly, the different scenarios of the link between
BPM and SCC that were identiﬁed in a taxonomy presented as a 2 9 2 matrix (see Fig. 2) can also assist practitioners in mapping the portfolio of the various SCs in
which they are embedded. The lessons drawn from the case
studies incorporate practical mechanisms of BPM and SCC
approaches that are critical to offering beneﬁts in terms of
collaborative advantage and organisational performance.
Collaboration with SC partners has to be regarded as vital
for competing in the market due to the fact that improving
the effectiveness of SC relationships enables the creation of
rare and valuable capabilities, allowing higher performance
levels than those that could be achieved when working
individually. Therefore, management should not consider
BPM and SCC as separate. Our research highlights how
and why BPM and SCC have to be implemented together
to achieve superior performance in the intra- and interorganisational relationship context.
Thirdly, according to our results, managers should
consider that the four contextual factors under investigation
have a minor impact. This means that BPM practices based
on the four common features of long-term planning, IT,
process improvement and top management support and
employee involvement and working collaboratively with
SC partners can lead to beneﬁts in terms of collaborative
advantage and organisational performance even when ﬁrms
have different characteristics. Nevertheless, managers
should consider allocating sufﬁcient efforts in terms of
resources and employee skills to convince SC partners to
implement more collaborative activities. Lastly, our results
inform on practices in a developing economy context (that
of Thailand); they should be of high relevance to companies’ management involved or aiming to be involved
directly or indirectly in operations in such an economy
context.

123



7 Conclusions and future research
This paper provides a deeper understanding of the
interrelationships between BPM, SCC, collaborative
advantage and organisational performance. Four case
studies were selected to participate in semi-structured
interviews to offer a greater understanding about the
relationships under study. Therefore, the reasons behind
the results of the relationships between BPM, SCC,
collaborative advantage and organisational performance
are explained. The main issues of: (1) the link between
BPM and organisational performance; (2) the link
between BPM and SCC; and (3) the contextual factors
and beneﬁts achieved from working collaboratively with
SC partners were explored to understand the actual
practices of BPM and SCC.
It is acknowledged that there are limitations of the study.
Firstly, the data collection was based on a few individual
ﬁrms. Future research could consider extending this
research by collecting and examining these relationships by
using a wider sample to compare the differences and
similarities to gain a comprehensive understanding within
each industry type. Secondly, the data collection was based
on one key respondent per company. Future research may
consider using a broader range of respondents from different positions to achieve a greater understanding of the
company’s BPM practice, its collaboration with SC partners and the beneﬁts achieved. Lastly, the study is scoped
at speciﬁc industry types and limited on the considerations
of the contextual factors. Therefore, future research could
consider other industry sectors and other contextual factors
(e.g. type of ownership) in order to identify the relationships between BPM, SCC, collaborative advantage and
organisational performance.

