Envisioning a healthier world – why the G20 matters
In September 2015, 194 countries signed on to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
providing an ambitious, universal and transformational vision. ‘Ensuring healthy lives and
promoting the well-being for all at all ages’ (SDG 3) is essential to overall sustainable
development, and made all the more relevant by the continued emergence of new pandemics
and global health challenges such as Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR). Despite progress on
surveillance and healthcare innovation, there are still devastating gaps in health outcomes
between and within countries. Life expectancy varies drastically between rich and poor,
healthcare is not universally accessible, and too many lives are cut short by preventable
infectious and chronic diseases. Ensuring ‘Health for All’ remains a persistent and entrenched
global challenge. As countries organize their national and local policies, SDGs provide a vision
for public policy that can lead to positive change based on evidence and political commitment.
To what extent will G20 governments elevate the priority accorded to health, and
acknowledge the centrality of health to achieving the SDGs? Some momentum appears to be
there, and in fact the G20 Action Plan lists Global Health as one of the fifteen Sustainable
Development Sectors (SDS) (G20 2016). The G20 will inevitably prioritize sectors of Agenda
2030 where it has a comparative advantage and adds value as a global economic forum.
Investments in health reduce poverty, contribute to economic growth, strengthen labor
productivity, build more equitable societies, address the need for gender equality, and,
contribute to human development. Consequently, as the G20 Action Plan is updated and adapted
to reflect successive G20 priorities until 2030, the health-related SDGs should achieve everincreasing prominence on the G20 agenda.
The 2016 Hangzhou G20 Leaders’ Communiqué mentioned health as an “issue affecting the
world economy” and confirmed its contribution to sustainable development but otherwise
restricted itself thematically to “explore in an inclusive manner to fight antimicrobial
resistance”. Under the Germany G20 Presidency health received much greater attention and
political leadership: for the first time, a G20 Health Ministers Meeting was held and the Berlin
Declaration - acknowledging the importance of health as well as the scale of the challenge
ahead – was adopted (Federal Ministry of Health, German 2017). Argentina will continue to
address health in its G20 Presidency, and like Germany will also host a health ministerial and
health experts working groups. Under an overarching theme of “unleashing people’s potential”,
Argentina’s 2018 G20 health priorities include strengthening health systems with a focus on
universal health coverage, prevention of childhood overweight and obesity, and antimicrobial
resistance and the fight against pandemics and health emergencies. This represents, largely,
continued coordination and collaboration in areas that were already emphasized in the Berlin
Declaration.
In order for real progress to be made against the health-related SDGs, health needs to remain
on the G20 agenda. The G20 has influence due to its comparative size and diversity. The G20
account for over 85% of world GDP, 80% of world trade, two-thirds of the world’s population.
Compared to the G7, the expanded membership of the G20 includes a wider array of interests
and realities: those of both developed high-income and emerging middle-income economies.
The G20 includes established aid donors, emerging aid donors, and countries at the centre of large regional trading blocs. In terms of health, the G20 countries have large populations
confronted with systemic health inequities, a diversity of health challenges and priorities, and a
range of health system arrangements and health financing modalities. Disagreements on
approaches to health are more likely and agreements possibly harder to achieve. However, the
benefits of health policy coordination via this forum will be in the best interest of each
individual country as well as the collective whole.
In this paper, we describe a two-year process of regional and global consultations (Figure 1),
from which recommendations of relevance to health and the G20 emerged. The consultations
provided a forum for an evidence-based exchange amongst researchers and practitioners for
whom a healthier world is a key dimension of sustainable development. We outline the process
by which these consultations originated and were organised, and summarise the key findings
that emerged during the dialogues. Based on these insights, the paper articulates a case and a
vision for G20 political leadership in which concerted attention is given to catalyzing progress
towards the SDGs by recognizing the centrality of health.

The consultations and dialogue – an inclusive, participatory process
In November 2015, 60 global health policy research institutions, researchers and international
agencies came together in Geneva to explore what it takes to accelerate the implementation of
the health-related SDGs. The participants of the meeting left convinced that the 2030 agenda is
only possible with different stakeholders acknowledging the links between the 17 Goals and
targets, and working together towards achieving the Goals (Jha 2016). After this first meeting, several regional and global events unfolded in 2016 and 2017. These meetings explored the role
of policy research institutions, evidence informed policies and meaningful engagement of civil
society and citizens in implementation and monitoring of these goals, specifically those that
relate to and impact on health.
Each consultation brought together at least 50 representatives from ministries of health, civil
society organizations, and academic and policy research institutions to identify the needs and
challenges of health-related SDG implementation, and provided a space to generate ideas for
collective action within countries, regionally and globally. The consultations reinforced the idea
that actions must be guided by a multisectoral approach, and it is critical to engage civil society
and citizens to generate evidence and to solve persisting health challenges. The regional and
global meetings have challenged development donors, researchers and policymakers to shift
thinking from global tools to contextualized solutions and targets, and from data collection to
co-construction and sharing of knowledge to bring positive change (Taylor 2017).

Findings from the consultations relevant to the G20 for global health
investment
The following findings, as well as some practical suggestions for action, emerged from the
consultations and fora outlined above.

1. Integrate health in all policies
Health-in-All-Policies is an approach to improve accountability for health impacts at all levels
of policy-making (WHO 2013; Adelaide Statement II 2017). It emphasizes the consequences of
public policies on health systems, and recognizes the influence of social determinants of health
on well-being. Given the SDGs’ multisectoral nature, Goals are interrelated (Blomstedt 2018)
and each Goal has a relationship to health and wellbeing. Hence, there is an urgent need to
consider the impact on health when other Goals are being implemented.
The Shanghai Declaration on Promoting Health in the 2030 Agenda reinforces that good
governance at all levels is crucial for better health (WHO 2017a). This requires investment and
action at national, local and global level. Concrete action is needed to address, among others,
the damaging effects of unsustainable production and consumption (SDG 12), to give
consideration to offset economic policies that create unemployment and unsafe working
conditions (SDG 8), to address marketing, investment and trade when it concerns health (SDGs
16 and 17).
Findings from the consultations indicate that this could be achieved through:
Recognising the economic case for health investments, in order to avoid the ongoing challenge
of premature mortality and to make significant progress towards achieving sound health for all
citizens. Health is central for individuals and households, for national growth and development
and it fundamentally contributes to employability and productivity (Jamison et al. 2013).
Economists have shown that investing in healthcare has long term benefits to society, not only in improving health outcomes but also in improving economic growth and gross domestic
product (GDP) (Stevens et al. 2015; Kapferer 2015). These arguments are particularly important
as a means of attracting interest and engagement from the policymakers, Ministries and donors
who contribute to national priority setting through the allocation of necessary resources to
health systems. At national level, the role of Finance Ministries is crucial, and to ensure that
health-related development outcomes are achieved, persuasive economic arguments are
important.
Acknowledging health as a fundamental human right because it stresses health for all to be a
justice issue, rather than aid and assistance. A human rights framing offers citizens new and
powerful social identities as co-owners of national resources, rather than being seen simply as
deserving recipients of support (Cochrane 2017; Ferguson 2015). It considers priority setting
and policy implementation by taking into account citizens’ rights to health and well-being, and
examining existing financial, cultural and social barriers to access to healthcare and health
equity. Such a framework can help address power relations and structural barriers (OECD
2006). Furthermore, it puts an emphasis on the guiding principles such as justice, participation
and non-discrimination in a policy making-process.
In the context of the SDGs leaving no one behind is particularly important for health rights.
It relates not only to SDG 1 on poverty, and SDG 10 on inequalities but to broader exclusion as
indicated through SDG 11, and it is closely linked to gender inequalities as indicated in SDG 5.
Although extreme poverty has been reduced globally, the inequalities within and between
countries have grown and need to be addressed from a human right perspective for the reasons
noted above. Development researchers, donors and partnerships can play an important role in
bringing this shift for a positive change (Neupane et al. 2016; Pratt and Hyder 2016).
Introducing measures to address determinants of health such as education and early child
development, as seen already in a number of countries such as Chile, Cuba, Kenya (WHO
2018). There is practically no health issue that does not need joint action with other sectors. For
example, the agriculture and animal sector need to work jointly to address antimicrobial
resistance (AMR). The role of the security sectors is critical in avoiding major disease outbreaks
and onward transmission. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) can only be addressed through
action on food systems, private sector, city planning, and health literacy. Child health can be
significantly improved if efforts coupled with stakeholders working towards SDG 1 (no
poverty), 2 (zero hunger), 4 (quality education), 5 (gender equality), 8 (decent work and
economic growth) and 17 (partnerships for the goals) (Blomstedt et al. 2018). Furthermore,
there are also co-benefits of investing in environmental measures and urbanization to improve
people’s health.
Making health a discussion in policy arenas and ensuring the cooperation between different
ministries of government and policy research institutions (WHO 2013). Examples and
inspiration from the governments that have already adopted governance processes, new bills and
legislation, which include health-impact-assessment (Government of South Australia and WHO
2017) should be consulted as part of the adoption of new policies. There are examples of
mayors as instigators of health in all policies to address well-being and quality of life in their cities; they are becoming an important global voice towards collective action for health
(Government of South Australia and WHO 2017).

2. Prioritize the most vulnerable
In many national contexts, the burden of disease, disability and premature mortality is
concentrated among the most vulnerable (Norheim et al. 2015). It is important to take into
account that vulnerability and exclusion vary in different contexts and changes over time.
Cooperation and partnerships that support inclusive ways to improve the health of the most
vulnerable, who may include, but are not limited to ethnic minorities, refugees, women and
people living in rural areas, have the potential to enhance the legitimacy of international
institutions and fora like the G20. Our findings suggest that the health of the most vulnerable
should be prioritized rather than aiming for the “lowest hanging fruit” as a way of
demonstrating more rapid success in meeting targets, within the G20 national contexts and in
low and middle-income countries (LMICs). This finding is not new and also supports World
Health Organization’s (WHO) mission of serving the most vulnerable (WHO 2017b).
This aim could be achieved through:
Identifying the most vulnerable populations by analyzing how access to healthcare and health
outcomes are affected by factors such as age, gender, ethnicity, rurality, displacement, and
disability within specific contexts. After identifying vulnerable populations in a given context,
nations can then show leadership and develop health strategies for these populations.
Considerations on the dimensions of marginality (availability, accessibility and affordability)
play a critical role in designing appropriate policies (WHO 2015; Chapman 2016).
Adopting and implementing Universal Health Coverage (UHC) domestically and supporting it
in LMICs in the most comprehensive form possible. Exclusions of coverage should be
exceptions rather than the norm. UHC is based on the principles of justice and equity and
addresses both the social determinants and the social implications of health by acting on the
broader socio-economic inequities that leave people behind (Frenz and Vega 2010). UHC is a
critical tool to enhance the legitimacy of national governments and reduce the threat of fragility
by providing citizens with the healthcare they need to fully participate in all aspects of life.
Scaling up primary healthcare and meeting the needs of all populations is the backbone of UHC,
upon which a progressive expansion of coverage of health services and financial protection can
be built (Chan and Brundtland 2016). Evidence based policymaking and strong partnerships
(government, the research community and civil society) will be needed to ensure that coverage
is equitable and that inequities are avoided in health outcomes. It is equally important that the
performance of UHC is continuously measured (WHO 2015 ).
Accepting responsibility for the quality of care that the most vulnerable face and acting on the
responsibility through the processes within the health systems, and promoting governance for
their health, including accountability and transparency. Good health among the most vulnerable
can be achieved with governments and other health actors taking a responsible, accountable and
transparent approach at various levels of health system governance (WHO 2014).

3. Engage citizens and communities to generate evidence and find solutions
The SDG framework provides a platform for G20 countries to take the lead on a reconfiguration
of public policy processes to engage citizens and empower communities through an inclusive
and whole-of-society approach. Without such a transformative measure the SDGs will not be
attained. The 1978 Alma Ata Declaration emphasized the mainstreaming of health equity on the
international political agenda and its focus on primary healthcare and people-centered care:
“People have a right and duty to participate individually and collectively in the planning and
implementation of their healthcare” (Medcalf et al. 2015). Since then, the concept of primary
healthcare has become a core concept of the World Health Organization’s (WHO) goal of health
for all (Medcalf et al. 2015).
Engaging communities in decision-making, planning, and implementing programs and
policies that are about their own health and well-being leads to citizen empowerment and
positive sustainable change (Freire 1970:125; Prost et al. 2013; Hernández et al. 2017; Gaventa
and Barrett 2010). However, this engagement needs to go beyond broad participation of citizen
groups, as the inclusion of women and the most vulnerable groups in these processes as key
stakeholders and agents of change is crucial in addressing health inequities. Citizen knowledge,
for example on perceptions of quality of local healthcare services beyond the provision of data
on access to services (Grover 2013), is essential if we are to not only focus on achieving health
outcomes, but also to understand the mechanisms by which these are achieved. Regular
dialogue and relationship building between health system actors and service users are central to
addressing tensions, changing mindsets and fostering respectful and culturally appropriate
healthcare practices (Hernández et al. 2017).
This could be achieved through:
Encouraging citizen-led ownership of strategies and processes to achieve positive health
outcomes. Although citizens in many national contexts are frustrated about the barriers
preventing their engagement in the policy- and decision-making processes that affect their daily
lives, when spaces are created and the ownership is shifted towards citizens and communities
they can mobilise to bring about transformative change. One such example has been the recent
efforts to mobilise communities around prevention of spread of the Dengue fever in Nicaragua
and Mexico (Andersson et al. 2015).
Adding processes and mechanisms to facilitate citizen engagement in data collection,
monitoring and feedback mechanisms in order to increase public accountability in solving
complex health challenges. It is important to acknowledge that concerns may exist regarding the
quality of data when broad stakeholder engagement processes are employed to generate data.
However, we argue that engaging citizens and communities in data collection processes does
not necessarily hinder data quality when protocols, methodologies and analyses are undertaken
in a robust manner. When undertaken with explicit attention to quality assurance, such processes can, in fact, enhance both quality of data and research by establishing mutual trust,
ownership and culturally appropriate measurement instruments (Esmail et al. 2015;
Viswanathan et al. 2004).

There is growing evidence for the value of gathering user evidence of the problems community
members experience regarding healthcare and services (Hernández et al. 2017). There is
increased availability of tested digital technology for G20 countries to consider data collection
engaging citizens and implement such feedback mechanisms from their citizens and in the lowmiddle income countries they invest in.
Working closely with conveners, such as civil society organizations, think tanks or policy
research institutions who work with citizens and communities. Such institutions not only bring
evidence, data and analysis to bear on health policy issues, but also convene policy dialogues,
roundtables, and consultations and provide spaces and platforms where different societal actors,
including government representatives, the private sector, and communities, can engage in an
informed and inclusive way.
Remaining aware at all stages of the role of citizens in solving health challenges and remaining
open to supporting enabling factors mentioned above. Prioritizing and systematically integrating
citizens’ inputs into decision making and policy processes can lead to sound health policies and
to their effective and accountable implementation.

4. Fill the health data gaps
The Global Partnership on Sustainable Development Data (2017) states: “Whether for reasons
of convenience, cost, or corruption, important decisions about how money and resources are
allocated to services helping the poorest people in the world’s least developed countries are too
often made based on data that is incomplete, inaccessible, or simply inaccurate—from health to
gender equality, human rights to economics, and education to agriculture” (see Global
Partnership for Sustainable Development Data 2016, http://www.data4sdgs.org/). Access to
quality data will make an enormous contribution to progress towards the achievement of the
SDGs. However, many countries encounter persistent problems related to health data
availability, quality and reliability.
In order to enhance healthcare coverage, for example, there needs to be an understanding of
existing gaps, in particular, reliable data on access to medication and healthcare services, and
who is being impoverished because of healthcare costs. Across and within countries, lack of
data comparability remains a challenge to monitoring global progress against the health-related
SDG indicators. Better data and statistics will help governments track progress, ensure that
decisions are evidence-based and strengthen accountability. A major limitation in this endeavor,
however, is the insufficient disaggregation of data at national and sub-national levels. G20
countries will need to find ways to maximize their technical and financial assistance for the
collection of internationally comparable data within their own borders as well as in datadeprived parts of the world.
Insights and findings from the consultations indicate that health data gaps could be reduced
through:
Investing in well-functioning civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) systems domestically
and via development investments in LMICs. This will provide policymakers with reliable, upto-date data in real time and at the lowest administrative level of the population. Without a CRVS system registering, at a minimum, all births, deaths, and causes-of-death, policymakers
are relying on surveys, censuses and other sources of incomplete data. Health information
systems in such settings may fail to capture the entire population, especially the most vulnerable
members of society.
Adopting a multisectoral approach to data collection, and putting in place mechanisms to
collect data across various actors such as governments, the private sector, researchers, policy
research institutions and civil society. If citizens and communities are engaged in data
collection, contextualized data will be gathered more effectively and will help fill in local data
gaps. Liaising with diverse stakeholders will benefit from their comparative advantage in
addressing the health data gap. For example, liaising with the private sector can ensure that
health data collected by business and private companies is more widely available for public
policy-making processes and accountability and transparency may also be is increased.
Adopting open access policy to share existing data to address the gaps and to maximize
utilization in research and policy-making.
Strengthening the institutions responsible for data collection by understanding their needs and
building their capacity to gather, store and analyze data. Institutions should also be
strengthened to collect reliable data and ensure quality.
Prioritizing data disaggregation to gather information and monitor progress on vulnerable and
marginalised populations.

Conclusions
The consultation findings shared in the paper confirm the approach suggested through the SDG
framework. It calls for policy processes grounded in robust evidence and analysis, that enables
multisectoral collaboration, that connects citizens with decision makers, and that generates
creative yet locally grounded solutions to
persistent health problems. The findings
Further research needed to answer:
also call on political leaders and
• Multisectoral collaboration for health and
policymakers to clearly recognize the
mechanisms to sustain it
role that a health-for-all approach can
• Sustaining quality of care in resourceplay in building nations that are more
deprived settings
inclusive, less divided, and less
• Role of different stakeholders in ensuring
polarized. Inclusive growth and health
data quality
for all, including health for the most
vulnerable, at the core of the agenda, is
key to ensuring the legitimacy of governments and other actors promoting health. The paper
highlights the important roles of different stakeholders in global health in promoting evidencebased policymaking. It demonstrates that meaningful partnerships and common vision is a
necessity of today. Further analysis will certainly be required to validate these findings within
specific contexts. It will also be important to design and test potential ways forward for G20