
Open Access

Performance measurement and KPIs for

which can reduce both the cost of producing products, and their environmental impact,
e.g. the amount of energy and raw materials used in their production, and the avoidance or postponement of waste sent to landfill.
Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are management techniques employed to enable
efficient and effective business monitoring, and are generally acknowledged to be a set
of measures critical to the current and future success of any organization [1, 2]. In the
view of Parmenter [1] “Performance indicators (PIs) tell you what to do. KPIs tell you
what to do to increase performance dramatically”.
While remanufacturing shares many similarities to traditional manufacturing, such as
batch or flow production and the use of machine tools etc., it also contains unique
challenges which can render the use of traditional KPIs inadequate for supporting some
business goals. These challenges and complexities often include incomplete product
knowledge, the need to source, disassemble and inspect cores to identify those suitable
for remanufacture, while balancing the uncertain supply chain. Measuring progress
against these additional challenges via Key Performance Indicators has appeared
in academic research [3, 4] but is underdeveloped industrially, when compared to
manufacturing.
The research presented in this paper has been carried out as part of the PREMANUS
project (Product Remanufacturing Service System), a European ICT project concerned
with developing an on-demand middleware to support End-of-Life decision making
and consequent remanufacturing, combining product information and product services
within one service-oriented architecture. As the title indicates, the project supports the
servitization of remanufacturing [5], and has created the ICT architecture and tools required to do this, particularly supporting strategic and operational decision making (a
review of over 40 decision making tools and techniques for remanufacturing is provided by Goodall [6]). The general aim of the work reported in this paper was to design
a set of KPI’s to assist remanufactures to enhance their businesses performance. Within
the project context, these KPIs are being used to measure and validate performance
gains during the two industrial pilots.
The following subsection provides a brief background into the use of KPIs, before
leading into the Method section, which introduces Kaplan and Norton’s wellestablished ‘Balanced Scorecard’ approach [7]. The abstracted Results are displayed
both as a table of KPIs, and as a diagram representing a remanufacturing ‘KPI toolbox’,
from which scorecards can be produced, tailored for individual remanufacturing scenarios. Scorecards for the two industrial use-cases are presented in the Conclusion section. Between these two sections is a Discussion on how particular reman challenges
have led to the selected performance measures.

Introduction to KPIs

This subsection introduces Key Performance Indicators as a fundamental Performance
Measurement tool, and outlines common KPIs used in general business scenarios.
KPIs should be used as a management aid to analyse an organization’s present
performance and to develop strategies for improvement. They must be deployed at the
organisational level that has the authority and expertise to take the required action [2].

other organizations or as a comparison over time [1, 2]. Parmenter also states a KPI
should ideally be a non-financial measure (i.e. not expressed in terms of currency).
Characteristics of KPIs are [1, 2]:
 Accountability: KPIs should be associated with the manager or team responsible for






the measure’s outcome.
Easily assimilated: KPIs should be quantifiable, accurate, and their meaning
understood by everyone within the organization. The measures should be
calculated from data which can be readily collected without undue cost.
Timely: KPIs should be measured frequently, reflecting current priorities.
Relevant: The measures should support strategic organizational objectives.
Consistent: KPIs should not conflict with other performance measures.

The optimum number of KPIs is, unanimously in the literature, fewer than 20:
Kaplan and Norton [8] recommend fewer than 20 KPIs, Parmenter [1] about 10, while
Hope and Fraser [9] and Price Waterhouse Coopers [10] suggest fewer than 10 KPIs.
KPIs may be classified into result/driver [11] and lead/lag. KPI measures may consider activity drivers (such as quality, flexibility, resource utilization and innovation) or
the results of activities (e.g. competitiveness, financial performance). Lead KPIs predict
future performance and enable future trends to be identified. Lag indicators present
historical results. Parmenter [1] redefines lead/lag indicators as past-, current-, or
future-focused measures. Current measures are monitored daily, past measures over
the past week or month and future measures consider initiatives targeting the next
day/week/month.
To derive a set of KPIs Price Waterhouse Coopers [10] recommend choosing those
measures which the Board uses to manage the business. KPIs should be selected
through discussions with stakeholders (employees, managers, customers) [12] and related to the business objectives (strategy) [2, 12] so as to enable progress to be assessed
against these objectives both internally and externally [10].
The KPIs should form a balanced set, for example, “measures of efficiency should be
set against measures of effectiveness, and measures of cost against quality and user perception” [2]. KPIs should also be placed in context, showing trends as well as the absolute performance [10]. KPIs may change over time as business priorities are revised,
and should be reviewed and updated accordingly [2, 10, 13]. Parmenter [1] believes that
KPIs should be linked to Balanced Scorecard perspectives (see Methods section).

Methods
The requirements for remanufacture in this project have been collated and identified
through various information sources comprising: a literature review, two detailed industrial case studies, formal (two) and informal (two) interviews with industrially-based
remanufacturing experts at production manager level or higher, and wider discussions
with the industry at a UK parliamentary networking event (2014) and two World
Remanufacturing Summits, (USA 2014, The Netherlands 2015). An iterative analysis
process was used to establish the KPIs. Based upon the challenges, business priorities
and strategies in each area, KPIs were either selected from established published KPIs,

within the research group and wider consortium and, of course, with the industrial
partners themselves, in order to confirm KPI complementarity and minimise conflicts.

The balanced scorecard approach

The methodology adopted for this research is based upon the balanced scorecard approach. This tried-and-tested approach, which provides a framework for translating
business strategies into performance measures, was developed by Robert Kaplan and
David Norton, and first published in “The Balanced Scorecard – Measures that drive
performance” in the Harvard Business Review in 1992 [7]. It built on several decades of
prior work in the USA and France and was notable at the time for adding non-financial performance measures to the traditional financial metrics, giving managers a more ‘balanced’
view of organizational performance. The Balanced Scorecard enables a top down implementation of the company’s strategies enabling individuals to understand how productivity
supports the overall system. It addresses current and future success, enabling a focus on
critical measures and providing a balance between internal measures like operating income,
and external measures like new product development. Emphasis on the different perspectives will vary across companies; hence different businesses will require different scorecards
[14, 15]. Six areas are included within this study to measure a remanufacturing business,
these are;
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Finance
Customers & Quality
Internal processes
Innovation & improvement
Employee satisfaction
Environment

Financial goals are linked to growth and profitability. To satisfy customers, goals for
timeliness, quality, performance, and service are required. Processes which impact most
upon the customer and the company’s core competencies should be prioritised.
Innovation and improvement activities consider product and process innovation and
specific improvement goals. Parmenter [1] adds two extra perspectives: environment
and community, and employee satisfaction. Environment and community initiatives
feed into customer perceptions and enable links to future employees. The employee
perspective considers staff recognition and satisfaction surveys, aiding a positive company culture and enhanced staff retention.

Results
A toolbox of KPIs has been compiled to cover general remanufacturing (Table 1
and Fig. 1) from which a balanced scorecard should be drawn, tailored for individual cases (as in the CRF and SKF use cases described later). In the figures, bordered boxes indicate the reman-specific KPIs compiled and formulated by the
author. The general production KPIs recommended are described in Table 2, while
recommended environmental (eco) KPIs are listed in Table 3. Datasheets for

Page 5 of 17

Table 1 Recommended KPI’s for remanufacturing
Category

General KPIs (Table 2)

Remanufacturing KPIs (Tables 4–11)

Finance

• Product Margin (PM)

❖ New Component Cost (NCC)

Customers & Quality

➢ Quotation Accuracy (QA)

• Core/Product Value Ratio (CPV)
➢ Lead Time (LT)
❖ Number of Concessions (NC)
• Work In Progress (WIP)

• Salvage Rate by Product (SRP)

• Cycle Time (CT)

❖ Salvage Rate by Component (SRC)

• Hours Per Unit (HPU)

❖ Core / Product Ratio(CPR)

❖ Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE)

❖ Core Class Distribution (CCD)

Innovation

• Number of Managed mBOMs (BOM)

❖ Core Class Assessment (CCA)

Employee

• Personnel Saturation (PS)

Environment (Table 5)

❖ Total Waste (TW)

Process

❖ Direct Energy Consumption (ECD)
○ Indirect Energy Consumption (ECI)
○ Materials Used (MU)
○ Recycled Materials Used (RMU)
○ Water Withdrawal (WW)
○ Total GHG emissions (GHG)
➢ Used by SKF for LoVol/HiVal independent remanufacturing start-up
❖ Used by CRF for established HiVol/LoVal OEM remanufacture
• Used in both remanufacturing scenarios
○ Used by neither remanufacturing scenario but included for completeness

New Components Cost NCC Table 4
Core / Product Value Ratio CPV Table 5
Core / Product Ratio CPR Table 6
Core Class Distribution CCD Table 7
Core Class Assessment CCA Table 8
Product Salvage Rate SRP Table 9
Component Salvage Rate SRC Table 10
Core Disposal Rate CDR Table 11


Table 2 Recommended General Production KPIs
Finance
Product Margin (PM)

Margin on each product remanufactured, expressed as a percentage.

Customers
Quotation Accuracy (QA)

The percentage difference between an estimated cost and the actual cost.
Negative values indicate an actual cost turned out to be higher than was
estimated; positive values indicate an over-estimate.

Lead Time (LT)

Production LT calculated as the time elapsed for specific operations, for example
for the assembly stage of products being remanufactured. Order Fulfilment Lead
Time is theoretically the total aggregated time from all processes, plus delays.

Quality

This KPI measures the number of validated requests of component design
modification to the OEM. The component design modifications are proposed
by the plant to enable the component reuse and increase the salvage. They are
validated and maintained centrally by the manufacturing department in an OEM.
On the other hand increasing the number of concessions could imply a loss of
quality, thus the objective is primarily to monitor the concessions but not
promote their increase.

Number of Concessions (NC)

Process
Work In Progress (WIP)

Cost of cores and components in (and committed to) production, normally
including direct labour and manufacturing overheads.

Cycle Time (CT)

Cycle time is the total time from the beginning to the end of a process; usually
the whole remanufacturing process.

Hours Per Unit (HPU)

Workload involved in producing the equivalent of one unit of product.

Overall Equipment
Effectiveness (OEE)

A set of non-financial metrics which reflect manufacturing success. Measures the
extent to which existing machines and equipment are producing the desired or
theoretical maximum output. OEE is a high level composite KPI that measures
output based on capacity, taking into account process availability, efficiency and
quality.

Innovation
Number of mBOMs (BOM)

The number of manufacturing BOMs managed in the plant. It reflects the size of
the portfolio of product families managed in the plant.

Employees
Personnel Saturation (PS)

Proportion of extra individuals needed to work on a particular product or
production line to cover all required operations and skills.

Table 3 Recommended Environmental (Eco) KPIs
Materials Used (MU) Total amount of material by weight or volume used in remanufacturing, including
materials purchased from external suppliers or from internal sources.
Recycled Material
Used (RMU)

Total percentage of recycled material used in remanufacturing process, i.e. material
which has comes from recycled waste stream.

Direct Energy
Total amount of energy used, derived from primary sources. Use of energy is one of
Consumption (ECD) the main drivers of impacts caused by a company’s activities.
Indirect Energy
Consumption (ECI)

Total amount of energy used, through purchase of electricity, gas, heat, steam etc.

Total Water
Withdrawal (WW)

Total volume of water withdrawn for internal use in the company’s processes
and activities.

Total Green House
Gas Emission (GHG)

Greenhouse gas emissions include both direct (gases included in Kyoto Protocol emitted)
and indirect (as a result of activities performed by the company). Indirect emissions can
be obtained by collecting data from relevant emissions-releasing activities (e.g. electricity
use, water supply, fuel used, waste treatment, waste disposal/recycling) and multiplying
them for conversion factors (DEFRA, 2012).

Total Waste (TW)


Table 4 New Components Cost KPI
New Components Cost (NCC)
KPI Description

This KPI family concerns the cost of new components used during the remanufacturing
process. New components can be obtained from a number of sources, here, examples
sources from Fiat are ranked from lowest to highest cash cost, and longest to shortest LT:
• Fiat (OEM) Powertrain plant manufacturing new engines (Powertrain component
cost KPIs: Pcc)
• Fiat (OEM) Spare parts and service department (Aftersales component cost KPIs: Acc)
• Third party i.e. open market suppliers (Supplier component cost KPIs: Scc)

Purpose (strategic) Reduce costs by increase salvage rate, through cost visibility, by highlighting external
component-sourcing costs.
Calculation

KPIs can be expressed as aggregate costs:
Sum of the absolute costs for all components from each of the three sources, e.g.:
• ∑Pcc = total € in a given period
• ∑Acc = total € for a given remanufactured product
Or ratios and proportions, e.g.:
• Scc / total reman costs for a given product = % costs of supplied components in a
remanufactured product
• %Pcc, %Acc, %Scc of remanufactured cores / period = composite % of new
components over time
• ∑Pcc, Acc, Scc / remanufacturing costs / period = new component costs as a proportion
of total reman costs over time

Data Source

ERP systems, purchasing and finance systems

Target

Decrease

Discussion
In this section aspects of performance management distinct to remanufacturing are
discussed. The particular challenges of remanufacturing in general are presented and
discussed first, illustrating some of the background work within the project, with each
subsection leading to recommendations for performance measurement approaches and
some example solution areas.
Business operations cover most production and supply chain management functions. In remanufacturing there are intrinsic uncertainties in planning, scheduling
and control of such functions [16] [17] (stock planning and control, process planning
and scheduling, disassembly value, by-products management and matching, reverselogistics, product knowledge). The three challenges listed below fall within the domains of
market supply and demand (Cores, and remanufactured products, respectively), and
reverse-logistics.

Table 5 Core / Product Value Ratio KPI
Core / Product Value Ratio (CPV)
KPI Description

This KPI measures the ratio of the Cost of the Cores at the point of acquisition, and the
Price at which the remanufactured Product is sold.

Purpose (strategic)

Ensure sourcing of high value cores.

Calculation

CPV = ( ∑ CoreCost(i)/ProductPrice(i))/n

Data Source

Sales systems and production management systems

Target

Below 1 and falling, to an equilibrium with NCC (and others)


Table 6 Core / Product Ratio KPI
Core / Product Ratio (CPR)
KPI Description

This KPI tracks the average number of cores used to produce one remanufactured
product (or equivalent).
It considers Work in Progress and stock-piled mid-build products as well as output, therefore
reflecting current status, and enabling use as a live / tracking KPI where the data streams exist,
as well as a more traditional summative / retrospective KPI for periodic review.
The objective is to decrease the number of cores processed for a given output; the
number of finished remanufactured products.
The inverse, the Product / Core Ratio (PCR), can be used instead, in the form of a percentage
or indicative fraction of a remanufactured product produced for each Core processed with in
the plant.
Although the advantages of either metric over the other are quite subtle, the recommendation
is that CPR, being focussed around the product rather than the core, is conceptually simpler and
creates a stronger message, i.e.: CPR 1.8 “We have to process almost 2 cores for each product
we can sell”, or PCR 55 % “From each Core we process we get just over half a product”
PCR as a percentage < 100 % offers another way of abstracting Core value away from
absolute cash cost.

Purpose (strategic) Encouraging the sourcing of higher-quality cores. Also rewards improvements in
remanufacturing process efficiency, but should be carefully considered and balanced
with process time and cost e.g. the Hour Per Unit KPI.
C
Calculation
CPR¼
PþSþWIP
PCR¼

PþSþWIP
C

C = Cores processed, P = Products shipped, S = Stocked mid-build products,
WIP = Work-in-Progress
Data Source

Sales systems and production management systems

Target

1 (one)

Supply, demand, and reverse logistics
Uncertain core arrival time

Although there are no universal patterns for the availability of Cores across industries
and geographical boundaries, there are specific patterns for specific industries or businesses. For instance, wind turbine related remanufacturing sees Core availability rise
outside windy seasons, when wind farms are less productive.
There are also many ways to provide incentives to smoothing Core availability times,
for instance, by replacement or return discount methods. The ideal is to smooth
out peaks and troughs of Core arrival time so that efficient capacity planning can
be achieved.

Table 7 Core Class Distribution KPI
Core Class Distribution (CCD)
KPI Description

The KPI displays the Core Class Distribution for selected products. For incoming products, it
gives an indication of the value of the Cores in stock. During remanufacturing, it indicates
the value of the WIP. The objective is to increases the number of Class A cores.

Purpose (strategic) Improve value of cores in stock
Improve WIP value
Calculation

CCD = (1.00 × number of Class A cores + 0.30 × number of Class B cores + 0.15 × number of
Class C cores) / total number of cores

Data Source

Production management systems

Target


Page 9 of 17

Table 8 Core Class Assessment KPI
Core Class Assessment (CCA)
KPI Description

Accuracy of the process of estimating core quality and condition. Differences between
initial estimates and actual core class assignment (after disassembly and inspection)
are aggregated.
CRF use the following Core classes:
A: complete, B: incomplete, C: incomplete with major flaw.
Other remanufacturing businesses use similar simplified techniques, while some (especially
high value product operations) bypass this step completely, some moving straight to cost
and time estimations.
In the case of CRF, an estimated Core Class will be computed remotely (using product-usage
metrics). The Core Class is then assigned at the engine entrance in the plant, and revised after
disassembly and inspection. The case of class under-estimation indicates lower product value,
an inaccurate model, and potential loss of opportunities. The case of class over-estimation
indicates added costs or lost resource. A penalty index is given to every accuracy error, with a
higher penalty index given to negative values (penalising the sourcing of low-value cores).

Purpose (strategic) Ensure sourcing of high value cores & accurate forecasting
X
CCA ¼
CCAðiÞ Â pðiÞ
Calculation
CCAðiÞ ¼ Actual CCðiÞ–Estimated CCðiÞ
Core Classes : A ¼ 100; B ¼ 70; C ¼ 10
CCA
p

CCA

p

−30

−2

30

1

−60

−4

60

2

−90

−6

90

3

Data Source

Sales systems and production management systems

Target

0 (zero)

A ‘Core supply smoothness’ KPI would be useful to some businesses, and could be
based upon the standard deviation of elapsed time between Core arrivals (in a suitable
metric, e.g. days, weeks, months). Potential solutions include the right mix of ‘make to
stock’ and ‘make to order’ [18].
Uncertain product demand

This uncertainty directly affects price, quantity, and availability of remanufactured
products. There are ways to smooth demand patterns by building stable customer
Table 9 Product Salvage Rate KPI
Product Salvage Rate (SRP)
KPI Description This KPI measures the percentage of reused components in a product, family of products, or a
moving average of all products.
Purpose
(strategic)

Improve plant RoI by decreasing total remanufacturing costs.

Calculation

Product level: Product Salvage Rate (SRP):

An excellent overall KPI influenced by many factors and also useful if used as a P-KPI for
identifying those products or product families most successfully remanufactured.
SRP(i) = r × ∑ SRP(j)
Where i is the product and j is a main components of the product r is the percentage of the
main component costs with respect to the total product costs
Operational level: Overall Product Salvage Rate (OSRP):
OSRP(i) = mean( ∑ SRP(i))
Where i is the instance in a set of selected products

Data Source

Production management systems


Table 10 Component Salvage Rate KPI
Component Salvage Rate (SRC)
KPI Description

This KPI measures the percentage of components and/or subassemblies salvaged. The higher
this percentage, normally the lower the total cost of remanufacturing, due to minimising
purchasing costs.
Some remanufacturers include salvaged components as those that are placed in stock; most
only include components that end up on shipped products. If used in tandem with a stock
efficiency KPI and/or NCC, the latter can be an effective general measure; however the former
is preferable if a metric focussed on component salvageability is required.

Purpose
(strategic)

Improve plant RoI by decreasing total remanufacturing costs.

Calculation

SRC(i) = Number of reused components of type i / total number of these components
entering the plant

Data Source

Production management systems

Target

100 %

relationship and implementing a lean production philosophy [19] to reduce cost while
maintaining quality. The study of demand pattern here is fundamental. Core Cost /
Product Price (simplified to Core / Product Value ratio, or CPV) will provide a catchall KPI encompassing many of these market factors (dependent as it is on the cost of
acquiring cores and the price achieved for remanufactured products, alongside general
production efficiency). Relevant KPIs could also draw from missed sales (or value) due
to e.g. price mismatch, limited stock, long lead time, inadequate warranty, lean metrics
such as stock level, and quality measures such as the number of customer complaints
and returned products within warranty.
Uncertain logistics costs

Most of this group of uncertainties are intrinsic to the remanufacturing industry. The
relevant contributing process Performance Indicators include the specific costs and
times related to collection, storage, disassembly, washing and inspection.
For businesses beyond a certain scale, solutions may lie in utilising buffer storage to
enable batch processing through disassembly-cleaning-inspection etc. via intelligent
Table 11 Core Disposal Rate KPI
Core Disposal Rate (CDR)
KPI Description

The percentage mass of cores which do not get remanufactured or whose components are
not salvaged or sold on. Components sold for material recycling are included in this
remanufacturing-specific version of the Mass Balance KPI.

Purpose (strategic) The overall objective is to maximise profitability while minimising environmental impact,
through reflecting the effectiveness of the:
• Remanufacturing process
• Core acquisition process
• Scrap material processing and sales process
Calculation

Expressed as a percentage of the mass of incoming Core material which is not sold or recycled.
CDR = Waste/(Mass of Incoming Cores + Mass of New Components)
Waste = Mass of Incoming Cores − Mass of Invoiced Goods
(Mass of Invoiced Goods includes: remanufactured products and components, components
sold unprocessed and for recycling)

Data Source

Sales and purchasing databases, MES, waste handling contractors.

Target

Falling target. When remanufacturing, Core acquisition, and scrap material sales processes

production grouping [20]. Success in this area will be reflected in many of the higher
level general production engineering KPIs listed in the previous section, such as Hours
Per Unit and Personnel Saturation.

Uncertain core condition

There has been substantial progress in monitoring and recording operational condition
during the use-phase of a product’s lifecycle (collecting field data). However, due to a
combination of complexity in operational environments, a lack of effective technologies
in covering the complexity, and a lack of apparent economic incentives, such efforts
often run short of providing full information on the conditions of the cores.
Core condition is a very important factor in remanufacturing, and many relevant
KPIs can be deployed to cover the range of Core-related activity.
The PREMANUS project is enabling early Core condition assessment based on a
combination of integrated condition monitoring, field data, in-situ inspection, and intelligent analysis of historic data for a range of similar products. In order to streamline
high-volume remanufacturing operations, ‘classes’ or quality bands will often be
employed. Improving the accuracy of this process would be monitored through a Core
Class Assessment (CCA) or similar KPI.
Monitoring the success of the Core acquisition process, with the aim of maximising
the proportion of high value Cores will be tracked through a Core Class Distribution
(CCD) KPI. Cores can be at the centre of (or at least a reference for) measuring the efficiency of other remanufacturing processes, such as waste disposal, through a Core
Disposal Rate (CDR) KPI, also encouraging improved environmental performance.
Potential solutions being developed within the project include a quick and basic condition inspection (before the often lengthy complete disassembly cleaning and inspection
process), combined with strategic use of incomplete product life data. The success of
these solutions and, again, the wider remanufacturing process can be tracked through
variance in the Core / Product Value Ratio (CPV) KPI. Warning of a decline in on-going
Core condition would be triggered by increases in the New Component Cost (NCC) and
Core / Product Ratio (CPR) KPIs.

Uncertain disassembly level

With familiar cores (via either the OEM or knowledge gathering during previous exposure
recorded at disassembly), one can plan the economically appropriate level of disassembly
for each model based on; subassembly condition, component value, replacement value /
time, and disassembling process costs, plus risks / value of damage in disassembly.
If possible, performance measures for cost and time should be calculated for discrete
stages in the disassembly process, via an Activity Based Costing or similar methodology, but focussing on the cost of new component sourcing and man-hours before,
and only if necessary, considering materials, consumables and allocated overheads.
Uncertain disassembly / assembly processes required, depending on the condition of
components, is a sub problem of the above disassembly-level challenge, but focusing
on process aspects. It might also affect and be affected by workstation layout, operator
deployment and other factors. Potential KPIs include remanufacturing Lead Time (LT),

Short notice period of component demand

In remanufacturing, defective components are often only discovered after disassembly, cleaning and inspection. There is then pressure to replace these components as soon as possible (through repair or replacement) in order to minimise
Lead Time (LT) and Work in Progress (WIP), but often with a cost penalty.
There are ways to solve the problem. Pre-disassembly inspection (such as endoscopic inspection) and Lifecycle Management information analysis belong to a group
of information related solutions; spare component / Core stock management belongs
to another category of buffering techniques; but are also information related.
The most relevant high level KPI is Lead Time but this is affected by a great
many factors and only by activities on critical paths. New Component Cost (NCC)
is a useful mediating indicator, as sourcing new components is often the expensive
‘solution’ to achieving short lead times. Salvage Rate by Component (SRC) will
highlight successful sourcing of used or reworked components from stock. A more
focussed KPI that considers ‘accuracy of predicted component need’ (maximise),
and ‘time between component need prediction and point of assembly’ (also maximise) is also recommended, to target this particular problem.
Benefit and cost indices can also be used to respectively encourage knowledge management activities and penalise responsive rather than pro-active decisions. These can
include factors such as:
 The value gained through retaining and using product design information (for

independent, non-OEM remanufacturers)
 The value of using product life cycle information to predict component demand
 The cost penalty attributed to a delay or long lead times

Uncertain quantity of salvaged components

If a disassembled Core is not remanufactured its salvageable components may be
retained, therefore uncertainty is most related to stock decisions and level control.
For established remanufacturing businesses, the recurrence of certain models of
Core should be apparent. In these cases the most relevant measurements concern
the time held in stock or rate of reuse for particular salvaged components. These
can also be aggregated to give an overall view of stock performance, with the value
of salvaged component stock also calculated as a complimentary measure.
The two KPIs that will be most useful in monitoring improvements here are New
Component Cost (NCC) and Core / Product Ratio (CPR). NCC measures the cost and
source of new components needed to complete the remanufacture of products, and will
reduce as the use of salvaged components increases (in this case, as a result of having
the right components available from stock on demand).
CPR indicates how many Cores are processed to produce each remanufactured
product. This reveals the number of components coming into the system (e.g. a
CPR of 2 would indicate a surplus of 1 set of components for every 2 Cores entering the system). Salvage Rate by Component (SRC) is an important compliment to

Conclusions
The following sections summarise the requirements and related KPIs prioritised by an independent (non-OEM) wind turbine gearbox remanufacturing business pilot, and by the
research arm of an automotive OEM for its established engine remanufacturing plant.

Wind turbine gearbox remanufacturing at SKF (Fig. 2)

This use-case represents three distinctive business and production scenarios:
 Low-volume, high-value ( < 100 units per year, > €100 k per reman unit)
 Non-OEM products (not SKF Cores, no official partnership with gearbox OEMs)
 Start-up business (business unit started as a one-year feasibility study)

In contrast, high-volume remanufacturers ( > 1000 units per year) can often look to
small efficiencies gained in repetitive production processes that, when multiplied by
high volumes, provide worthwhile cost savings, and an acceptable return on investment. These industries, such as automotive, often have particularly small margins on
the manufacture of components, due to the maturity and competitiveness of the sector.
Project and batch production operations, such as low-volume high-value asset remanufacturing, often have the opportunity to look elsewhere to maximise profit (e.g. by
maximising sales price through differentiated and value-added offerings). This is especially true in industries that are still developing, such as remanufacturing. The quoting
process is much more important here, as obviously there is a lot more at stake when
profit comes from a small number of high-value projects. Also related is the need to
build customer relationships – a critical process for start-ups. Estimate accuracy is the
main concern here, with customer lead-time (LT) also important. Building supplier relationships and, later, integrated supply chains, would be the next priority. Knowledge
management is especially important with independent start-up remanufacturers. KPIs
measuring rate or frequency of knowledge re-use, and the value gained by it should be
investigated.
The low volumes enable the business priorities listed in Table 12 to be addressed.
The associated KPIs can be recorded for both individual units (product instances) and
aggregated to calculate the average values for product types, families or for remanufacturing processes. Many of the business priorities can be KPIs in their own right (see


Page 14 of 17

Table 12 Priorities and KPIs for LoVol/HiVal independent remanufacturing start-up
Finance

Innovation

Margin: PM, CPV

Adaptability: BOM

Revenue: (HPU, WIP, SRP)
Customers & Quality

Employee

Success rate for offers: QA, (BOM)

Utilisation: PS

Response time to customer: LT

Knowledge sharing: PS, (BOM)

Processes

Environmental

Throughput time: CT

Waste: CDR

Technical errors: HPU
SRP, WIP

Background section) but the more-specific, further-reaching and easier-to-calculate
KPIs listed are those recommended.

Automotive-class engine remanufacturing at Fiat (Fig. 3)

The CRF / Fiat remanufacturing use-case is characterised by the following features:
 High-volume, low-value (< €10 k per unit, > 1000 units per year)
 OEM products (carried out by or in close partnership with the Core OEM)
 Established businesses ( > 10 years)

In addition to a standard set of high level business KPIs (Table 13), specific process
KPIs defined as technical or product KPIs are aggregated according to criteria such as
the period, the family of engine, or remanufacturing phase. Plant managers compare
the price at which a Core is acquired with its estimated value on arrival at the plant,
and again after disassembly and full inspection. Core / Product Value Ratio (CPV) can
be calculated and used at this product instance level, as well as a good catch-all
medium-term monitoring KPI for both general plant performance and to track trends
in product families.
Most other process KPIs are taken from general production engineering: Overall
Equipment Effectiveness, an old but still common hierarchy of metrics to evaluate how

Page 15 of 17

Table 13 Priorities and KPIs for established HiVol/LoVal OEM remanufacturer
Finance

Innovation

Net engine margin: PM, CPV, (OEE)

Adaptability: BOM

Revenue: (HPU, WIP, SRP)

Core management: CCA, (CCD, CPR)

Purchasing costs: NCC
Customers & Quality

Employee

Offering: (BOM)

Utilisation: PS

NC

Knowledge sharing: PS, (BOM)

Processes

Environmental

Throughput: CT

Scrap rate: CDR, TW

Technical errors: HPU, (NC)

Energy: ECD

Salvage: SRC, SRP
OEE, WIP, CPR, CCD

reduction in the immobilised capital (Cores, engine bases, semi-assembled engines and
components); Number of concessions (also called exceptions); Cycle-time, of specific
operations or the whole reman process; and Number of Managed mBOMs, measuring
the number of product families managed in the plant and reflecting a multitude of
cross-category benefits (e.g. flexibility, workforce training, customer responsiveness).
Reman-specific KPIs focus around core/product and salvage ratios. The broad objective to decrease the number of Cores acquired with respect to the number of engines
remanufactured is monitored at high level, via Core / Product Ratio, and at a more detailed level via Salvage Rate. Either or both an engine perspective (percentage of salvage
for each, or a specific family of remanufactured engine) or a component perspective
(percentage of each component salvaged for remanufacturing) can be useful. In all
three cases, the objective should be to increase the ratio of reused components over
new components in the remanufactured engine, leveraging the incoming cores quality.
Core acquisition quality management is a particular focus of CRF (but not necessarily
typical of the industry). It requires separate monitoring, via a custom-made ‘Core Class
Distribution’ KPI. Aggregating over several Cores, the objective is to increase the percentage of Class ‘A’ Cores (highest quality) with respect to other classes.
Abbreviations
BOM: Bill of Materials; CCA: Core Class Assessment; CCD: Core Class Distribution; CDR: Core Disposal Rate; CPR: Core /
Product Ratio; CT: Cycle Time; CPV: Core / Product Value (Ratio); HPU: Hours Per Unit; ICT: Information and Communication
Technology; KPI: Key Performance Indicator; LCA: Life Cycle Analysis; LT: Lead Time; NC: Number of Concessions; NCC: New
Component Costs (and Source); OEE: Overall Equipment Effectiveness; PM: Product Margin; PS: Personnel Saturation;
QA: Quotation Accuracy; SRC: Component Salvage Rate; SRP: Product Salvage Rate; WIP: Work In Progress.
Authors’ contributions
IG carried out the majority of the research, analysis, KPI formulation and editorial work. PG assisted throughout the
project, specifically with the interviews and the paper’s production, CP provided introduction and method section
drafts, and YP provided the discussion section draft. AW and PC advise on the project and were involved in its
conception. JM and FD established the pre-project performance measurement strategies within their respective
companies. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
IG is a Senior Researcher and Lecturer in Engineering Design at the Wolfson School of Mechanical and Manufacturing
Engineering, Loughborough University. Coining the term ‘Interactive Optimisation’ to describe his specialism within
the field of Humanised Computational Intelligence, he applies this approach to generative and evolutionary CAD,

has a BEng in Product Design and Manufacture, and a PhD in Genetic Algorithms for Evolutionary Design, the latter
becoming the EvoShape CAD application.
PG is a Research Associate in the Wolfson School. He graduated from Loughborough University in 2010 with a MEng
in Mechanical Engineering and in 2015 with a PhD in Remanufacturing Decision Support. His current research interests
include intelligent manufacturing, remanufacture, product service systems and data analytics.
YP is a Research Associate with research interests including production planning and control, and information and
systems engineering in manufacturing.
CP is a Research Associate with over fifteen years research experience in applying artificial intelligence and information
modelling techniques to engineering problems. She joined the School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering
at Loughborough University in 2008. Her research interests include intelligent manufacturing, process modelling,
ontologies, and knowledge management and verification.
PC is Professor of Manufacturing Processes and Dean of the Wolfson School, where he also leads the Interconnection
Research Group. He is also the Director of the EPSRC’s Innovative electronics Manufacturing Research Centre and the
EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Embedded Intelligence. He has previously worked for the Fisher Body Overseas
Corporation, National Physical Laboratory and GMC. Active in research, training and consultancy in electronics manufacture
and packaging since 1990, and holding substantive research awards from the UK’s EPSRC, DTI, and TSB and from the
European Commission, he has published widely in this field. His interests lie in: manufacturing processes; simulation;
sensing, actuation and control; process-materials interactions; manufacturing knowledge management and utilisation,
remanufacturing of high value assets and products, wireless sensor networks and embedded intelligent systems.
AW is Professor of Intelligent Systems in the Wolfson School. He obtained a First Class Honours degree in Physics and
a Ph.D. in Astrophysics from Leeds University. Following research at Cambridge University he became a faculty
member at Loughborough University in 1995. His interests include embedded intelligence, adaptive informatics and
the generation of novel manufacturing systems and services for industrial control and monitoring. He has generated
more than 70 research proposals funded by UK, EU government and industry and is co-author of around 180 refereed
journal and conference papers. His exploitation activities involve the directorship of four spin out companies servicing
novel control and monitoring solutions within the automotive, electronics, aerospace and healthcare domains.
JM is a project manager in the Process Research department of the FIAT Research Centre (CRF), where his work
primarily concerns the optimisation of industrial processes (Manufacturing and Remanufacturing, Logistics, Product
Development). He is involved in many internal projects within the FIAT Group, particularly in the areas of plant
logistics and manufacturing. He has previously been involved with several international research programmes in the
area of Supply Chain and Production Management.
FD is a program manager within business development at SKF. Formerly he was responsible for co-managing a gearbox
re-manufacturing business unit and implementing a management system for the remanufacturing process. Prior to this he
studied mechanical engineering and economics, receiving a both a diploma and a Master of Business Engineering.
