Introduction
Evolutionary anthropological studies highlight the challenging factors that society is facing
as a whole. Worldwide demographic growth cannot be sustained at the same pace as finite
natural resources. Climate change due to environmental pollution caused by industrial
development is another major danger, which leads to significant ecosystems imbalances.
Faced with these challenges, the strategy proposed by the European Commission in the
bioeconomy sector (European Commission, 2012) identifies risks in geopolitics and
proposes a series of ambitious goals, including: decreased dependence on finite resources,
adaptation to climate change and mitigation, food security and new jobs created in rural
areas.
Managing the transition to bioeconomy in order to achieve the objectives set by the
European Forum entails a collection of data, such as development of knowledge of the
sectors generating biomass, feedback on economic interests and data on national
government policy as a starting point to a documented analysis to determine the current
stage in the transition. Economic modeling is the next step in the Contextual Conversion
Scenario to respond to predictable estimations communicated by decision makers. Research
activities in the field of bioeconomy will significantly contribute to the knowledge of
biomass production potential, identifying the potential barriers to the development of this
new industry.
Until now, many industrialized countries have developed strategies and policies for a
circular economy based on the reuse of biomass. Romania, in turn, has an environmental
strategy that allows the future development of bio-economy. Current studies identify the
need to determine the intersectoral correlations, respectively the modalities of the
relationship between the different sub-sectors of the bioeconomy, which are generating new
products.
This article aims to develop a model for analyzing sectoral interdependencies, taking into
account exogenous variables such as resource production, production expenditures,
government policy, investment in technology, R&D and innovation, to assess the prospects
of transforming the traditional economy.

1. Presentation of the management model in the economic literature
Economic literature abounds in models for assessing the transition to bioeconomy. Authors
such as Rick Bosman and Jan Rotmans have studied comparatively the two models of
management of the transition to bioeconomy in Finland and the Netherlands. The research
paper (Bosman and Rotmans, 2016) contains a series of recommendations tailored to the
national economic characteristics of the two countries. As such, the authors note a useful
suggestion to develop the public-private partnerships in which both public decision makers
and the private sector find the right solutions to meet the challenges in managing the transition
to bio-economy. An example is provided by the partnership between the European
Commission and the Bioindustry Consortium, whereby the state and the private sector invest
in innovative technologies for bio-industry to generate new biomass products. This inevitably
implies a change in the behavior of the human factor, which understands the need to move

economic model that embraces the innovative factor (Carrez and van Leeuwen, 2015).
A management system for the transition to the bioeconomy needs to know in detail what
the functional requirements for transforming a traditional economy into the bioeconomy
are. Sustainability of analysis models has been the subject of research in economist work
(Hockings et al., 2006). The modeling of sectoral interrelationships is constantly evolving,
requiring a quantitative and qualitative analysis. For example, it is possible to analyze in the
short term the impact on the price evolution of a bio product produced in a secondary sector
as a result of the increase in the prices of the basic resources of the primary sector. In
addition, the evaluation criteria are varied, belonging to a multitude of disciplinary
sciences, from biodiversity to food safety (European Commission, 2012). For this reason,
there is no perfectly integrated model of management that aggregates the totality of the
exogenous variables, for these reasons as we mentioned related to the continuous
development of the interdependence relations and the multitude of variables.
Economic modeling requires a permanent adaptation to the specific economic context,
being integrated into a scenario adjusted for government policies and private demand for
biomass and bioenergy products (Angenendt et al., 2018). This contextual, specific
approach is particularly useful in the decision-making process in order to develop a
technology appropriate to the development in the biomass-producing sectors and to assess
the contributions of these sectors to the production of positive externalities on
competitiveness and production in the tertiary sector as well the pharmaceutical industry,
the chemical industry, or the biofuels industry. Nowicki et al. (2007) detailed the economic
analysis at the level of the economic sub-sectors (for example, horticulture as a sub-sector
of agriculture) and, accordingly, the modeling was determined at the level of products that
could contain bio-ingredients.
From the perspective of the economic models used in the research work, they can be
classified into dynamic models of general equilibrium applicable to analyze multi-sector
macro interdependencies (i.e. energy ‒ agriculture ‒ bioenergy ‒ bioindustry) developed by
economists such as Poganietz (2000), Van Meijl (2006), Banse et al. (2014), economic
equilibrium models applicable to certain economic sectors (Izaurralde et al., 2012) defined
as partial models and bottom models (Janssen et al., 2010), which respond to contextual
questions related to technological, procedural or behavioral development, studying in detail
the procedural aspects related to the generation of biomass sources, respectively the
production of the economic and ecological effects resulting from these processes , whether
and to what extent they meet these expectations. Temporary definition and location in
geographic space is of particular significance to conceptualize the management model. This
explains why a model performs better in one country than in another or can give clues as to
the evolution of the transition to the bio-economy during a period of time.
Research studies conducted in the European Economic Area often have common
benchmarks for contextual analysis. This is largely due to the two projects launched at the
European Union level by the European Commission, which substantiate the framework for
assessing the transition to the bio-economy. The first project was launched in November
2012 and refers to the Analysis Toolbox to respond to the EU's Bioeconomic Strategy
(System Analysis Tool framework for the EU Bio Based Economy Strategy SAT – BBE
within the EU 7th Framework Programme). The first research project makes an inventory
of industries with the potential to generate biomass products and identifies barriers to the
development of the new industry. The second project was launched by the European
Commission in February 2013 and aims at integrating the data collected in the first project
and at conceptualizing them in a computer system. The institution that processes this data is
the European Observatory for Bioeconomy. The conceptual model used describes the
interaction between society and the environmental factors. The management system is
defined by the human, demographic, consumerist factor, biophysical processes and the
limited natural resources, the technological progress and innovation, and last but not least,
the governance policy of the state.
The economic modeling of human behavior is influenced by the economic context and
cultural affiliation of individuals, in accordance with the principles of the universal theory
of multilinear evolution. Thus, condensing the opinions of anthropologists Leslie Alvin
White (1975) and Julian Haynes Steward (1972), the change of mentality gradually takes
place in a process of awareness of the need for transformation.
From the perspective of the transition to bioeconomy, at national level, we observe the
potential generated by certain industries, specific to the basic sectors, for the production of
biomass, such as agriculture, zootechnics, fish farming, wood processing, secondary sectors
such as bio-industry (i.e. biodegradable plastic products, biofuels), the food industry and
tertiary sectors, interdependent on the first two, such as the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries.
The National Strategy for Research, Development and Innovation 2014-2020 identifies, on
the basis of a public consultation, the areas of intelligent specialization for the development
of bio-economy (GD no. 929 / 21.10.2014). There is a constant need for information and
communication on biomass production, support for environmental research and limitation
of certification costs, to increase productivity and competitiveness of sectors with the
potential to generate new, affordable products. Additional investment is needed in
technology, so as indicated by the data collected in the research (PwC, 2017). According to
the study, the share of GDP gross value added in agriculture is positioning Romania on the
first place in the European Union. Given the large number of nurseries in the agricultural
sector compared to the European average, the productivity of the sector is relatively low.
Also, the yield of agricultural production, relative to arable land, is low compared to the
European average due to the fragmentation of agricultural holdings, the level of
professional training of farmers, the low level of capitalization and the regulatory
framework.
The conceptual model is essential to manage the transition to the bio-economy
development. The reflective indicators demonstrate the efforts of civil society, the political
and business to meet objectives bioeconomy or sustainable resource management,
development of new technologies for biomass production, support processes to reuse
resources, food security, increase food quality and pharmaceutical, economic and social
prosperity by creating new jobs, developing infrastructure for recycling and, last but not
least, encouraging sustainable consumption patterns. Economic reforms, environment and
research policies adopted, changing forms of organization are necessary elements to turn
negative externalities in the bioeconomy benefits.

to bioeconomy
According to the study by Mariusz Maciejczak (2015) on the determinant productive
factors for bioeconomy, it is noted that Romania is the best placed from the EU Member
States to produce biomass from waste. Based on this, we have conducted a case study in the
biomass industry for enterprises active in the agricultural sector, considering the main
biomass sources, namely grain crops.
We determine the performance of biomass producers according to the two indicators: the
percentage indicator of the variation of biomass production, based on waste reuse, and the
variation in the rate of revenue from sales of production relative to operating costs. These
will be dependent variables in the model.
The independent variables are as following:
 Innovation, research and development (indicators: investments in biotechnology or
new infrastructure, patents, patents or licenses issued, number of R&D employees, the
existence of biotechnology labels or processed organic products needed to inform
consumers or distributors – i.e. ecolabels);
 Regulation (public funding programs, tax incentives provided in national legislation,
incentives for investments in the field);
 Knowledge and skills (no information or communications sent by producers on the
benefits of using biomass within the production-distribution chain, for awareness of the
importance of the field among each participant, no qualified personnel, no training courses
for the training of specialists in the field of bio-economy, no participation in bioeconomy
discussion forums, for transfer of expertise;
 Motivation of employees to determine the extent to which they are stimulated to
integrate into the workforce, incentives for outstanding performance, motivation for the
transition to bioeconomy;
 The performance of the production process (the existence of an integrated
management information system, the existence of a circular flow of product reuse, based on
their characteristics, i.e. biodegradable products, reintegrated into agriculture as a resource
for generating new production, product lifetime.
2.1. Brief description of the biomass sector in Romania
Biomass is part of the alternative energy resources and can be divided into four general
categories:
 Wastes: agricultural waste, agricultural waste, crop residues, wood waste, urban
wood waste and urban waste;
 Forest products: wood, wood residues, trees, shrubs and wood scraps, sawdust, bark
etc. from clearing forests;

 Energy crops: short rotation woody crops, herbaceous woody plants, herbs, starch
crops (corn, wheat and barley), sugar crops (cane and beet), crop crops (herbs, lucerne and
clover), soybean, sunflower, saffron);
 Aquatic plants: algae, water weeds, hyacinth water, cane and fats.
Biomass is the fourth most important global energy source after coal, oil and natural gas it
is (Ladanai and Vinterback, 2009). Typically, biomass production can be divided into two
categories: bio ENER GIE (the process by which biomass products it is burned to generate
heat and electricity) and biofuels (biomass products are converted into liquid fuel using the
replacement of petroleum products in transport).
Agricultural waste is another segment of biomass. Although Romania has a wide variety of
crops, only a few of these are used for energy production, mainly due to the technical
limitations of the conversion process (Colesca and Ciocoiu, 2013). The main sources of
energy from their crop processing:
 Oilseeds (rape, sunflower and soybean) used for biodiesel production;
 Sugar and starch crops used for the production of bioethanol (wheat, corn, corn,
barley, potatoes and sugar beet);
 Woods (hells) used for heat and energy production.
Unfortunately, in Romania there are not many incentives for the use of modern biomass
technologies to transform this into thermal and electrical energy. Thus, the latest available
data indicate a total consumption of 3859 ktone/year, of which 3240 ktone /year consumed
in the old traditional rural stoves and 619 ktone/year in the consumer industry and tertiary
(Bioheat 2016).
It terms of bioenergy, Romania has not progressed very much compared to 2007. In 2007
local production of biodiesel and bioethanol started. At the level of 2016, the potential of
biodiesel was of about 400,000 tons/year and 120,000 tons/year for bioethanol (NREAP,
2017). Romania's potential to supply biodiesel production (sunflower, soybeans, rape) was
around 580 thousand tons / year and bioethanol production around 560 thousand tons/year
(consisting of 41 thousand tons / year of corn seeds and 150 thousand tons one / year of
wheat germ) (ENERO, 2017).
The most promising way for the production of biofuels is rapeseed (EC, 2003). In 2016,
circus 161.000 tons of biofuels, accounting for 3.2% of total transport fuels (EBRD, 2017)
was produced in Romania. Directive 2003/30 / EC on the promotion of the use of biofuels or
other renewable fuels for transport was included in the national legislative framework and in
accordance with the law, biofuels shall replace gasoline and gasoline up to 10% by 2020.

2.2. Research Methodology
In order to achieve an economic modeling in the management of the transition to
bioeconomy, the following statistical hypotheses were formulated:
 H1: The motivation of the employees has a positive impact on organizational
performance;
performance;
 H3: The strategies and the commercial policies have a positive influence on
organizational performance;
 H4: Operational integrated processes have a positive impact on the organizational
performances;
 H5: Employees’ motivation is positively related to the performance of the
organization.
A survey-based assay was carried out with the help of a questionnaire and the research
hypothesis were tested using Partial Least Square model. Data were processed using the
SmartPLS 3 software (SmartPLS GmbH, Boenningstedt, Germany) (Ringle et al., 2015).
The main purpose of its analysis it was the analysis of the transition to bio-economy of
biomass-producing enterprises in Romania.
The objective of this study is validating the economic model by analyzing data collected
from Biomass energy sector in Romania. The paper also analyzes the impact of the
econometric model, represented by innovation, regulation, level of knowledge and skills,
production process performance and human factor motivation in the performance of
biomass producers.
The data collection was done through a survey which was addressed to employees and
managers in the biomass production sector. Biomass companies were selected in proportion
to their size. The sample chosen was random and the sample size was calculated by
multiplying the number of indicators by 5-10 (Kristensen et al., 2010). Thus, the size of the
sample should have at least 15 indicators × 5 = 75 respondents. The authors collected data
from 90 respondents out of which 80 were valid. The questions were either binary, with
answers (Yes = 1, No = 0), or they used a 7- point Likert scale where the choices ranged
from "very little = 0" to "very much = 1". The questionnaire has been tested several times
to ensure that language, format, and order of questions are appropriate.
The following five proxy variables were considered important factors in the implementation
of the model (Table no. 1): innovation in the production process (Malerba, 2002; MainarCausapé et. al., 2017), sector level regulation (Crafts, 2006; Mengat et. al., 2018),
knowledge and skills level (Boyatzis, 2006; Müller et. al., 2009), production process
performance and motivation of employees.
Table no. 1: Description of the variables in the model
Innovation (INOV)
Inov_1
Inov_2
Inov_3
Reglem_1
Reglem_2
Reglem_3

30

Existence of investments in biotechnology
Labeling for biotechnology or processed organic products
The existence of patents or license issued
Regulation (REGLEM)
Funding programs from public funds
Tax incentives provided for in national law
Knowledge_3

Prod_1
Prod_2
Prod_3
Motiv_1
Motiv_2
Motiv_3

AE

Knowledge and competences (KNOWLEDGE)
Information or communications submitted by producers on the
benefits of using biomass in the production-distribution chain
Training courses for the purpose of training specialists in the field of
bioeconomics
Participation in bioeconomy discussion forums for transfer of
expertise
Performance of the Production Process (PROD)
The existence of an integrated management information system
The existence of a circular flow of product re-use based on their
characteristics
Product life
Motivation of the employees (MOTIV)
Motivation employees to determine the extent to which they are
stimulated to integrate into the workforce
Incentives given for outstanding performance
Employee motivation for the transition to bio-economy

The variables described above will be the independent model latent variables of the model,
while the reflective dependent variable is the "biomass producer performance" determined
by two proxy variables: "percentage change of biomass production based on waste reuse"
and "variation rate of revenue from the sale of production in relation to operating expenses”
(Mohr-Jackson, 1998).
The dependent variable together with the independent variables described above lead to the
construction of the structural model that will be tested and validated in the next chapter
(Figure no. 1).

Figure no. 1: The structural model incorporating the results of managerial decisions
on the transition to bioeconomy
The questionnaires were addressed to both executive and corporate executives in June 2018
and were finalized at the end of July this year. In Table no. 2 show the distribution of
biomass production companies as well as the respondents of the questionnaire. They were
selected in proportion to the distribution of enterprises, thus obtaining a sample
approaching the optimal theoretical combination.
SME
Big Enterprises
Total

Producers of Biomass
82
8
90

Sample
80
10
90

The analyzed sample consisted of 90 executives and managers from companies operating in
the biomass industry in Romania, stratified by sex, age, income, status and level of
education, directly interviewed directly, the questionnaire containing 20 of questions.
In the elaboration of the questionnaire the stratified sample method was applied. The data
were collected during June 1 ‒ July 30, 2018, using an open questionnaire and the main
limitation of the data collection process was the lack of co-operation of the individuals
surveyed. The main objectives of the study were: to identify respondents' level of
knowledge regarding bio-economy based on education level, gender, age and interests’
respondents; assessing innovation and R&D in enterprises; determine the degree of
regulation in the sector; assessing the knowledge and skills of employees and assessing the
production process of biomass enterprises in the perspective of the transition to
bioeconomy.

3. Results and discussions
The degree of significance of the conceptual model variables will be verified before the
model is analyzed. This will be done by calculating and interpreting the coefficients
"Dillon-Golstein” and "Cronbach's Alpha" (Tenenhaus et al., 2005). The values of these
indicators can be seen in table no. 3.
Table no 3: Reliability and validity of the variables
Construct
INOV
REGLEM
KNOWLEDGE
PROD
MOTIV

Dillon
Golsteins’ rho
1.000
1.000
0.712
0.621
0.678

Cronbach's
Alpha
1.000
1.000
0.723
0.691
0.682

Composite
Reliability
1.000
1.000
0.821
0.679
0.682

AVE

VIF

1.000
1.000
0.712
0.677
0.651

2.221
1.418
1.528
2.798
2.392

From the table above, it can be noted that the values associated with the variables in the
model are all greater than 0.7, which is why it can be concluded that all five latent variables
are significant in our analysis. In addition, the collinearity of the latent variables has been
tested. According to Hair et al. (2013) collinearity between independent variables is present
if their VIF values are greater than 5. According to the data in the table, we can conclude
that the exogenous variables in the model are not collinear.
The econometric analysis was carried out by the Partial Least Squares ‒ Structural Equation
Modeling (PLS-SEM) method. This consists in the creation of two sub-models, namely the
structural model "internal model" and the measurement model, quantification, "external
model". The PLS-SEM model was chosen because it is more robust than other similar
methods (i.e. CB-SEM), but also less sensitive to small samples, asymmetric distributions
or the presence of multicollinearity (Hair et al., 2013).
3.1. The measurement model
The measurement model was achieved by the convergent and discriminating validity
method. From a statistical point of view, the relation between the reflexive and the dormant
variables can be determined by means of structural equation modeling (SEM):
{x = Ψx ϑ + εx

(1)

{y = Ψy η + εy

(2)

where:
ɳ - endogenous latent variable;
ϑ - exogenous variable;
x and y - observed variables;
Ψx and Ψy - matrices of the systems of equations corresponding to latent variables;
εx and εy - the residual variables.
3.1.1. Convergent validity
When a latent variable explains a significant part of the variance of its constructs, the
convergent validity must be verified (Nakasul, 2017). The convergent validity is examined
by the extraction of variance indicator (AVE ‒ average variance Extracted), which
measures the variation that a latent variable is capturing its variables associated with the
total variance of the variance, including the variance of the error of measurement (Rust
Huang, 2012). At a level above 0.5, the latent variable explains more than half of the
variance of its latent variables (Čihák et. al., 2013).
According to Chin (2010), the variables for which the coefficients are less than 0.5 are
excluded. Thus, the following variables will be excluded from the model: inov_1, inov_3
reglem_1 and reglem_3. These are variables whose coefficients are less than 0.5 in figure no. 2.
Model I

Figure no. 2: PLS-SEM Measurement Model 1
Source: Results determined by the authors valuing the SmartPLS 3 software
previous one. By SEM-PLS a second model resulted (Model II), as outlined in Figure no. 3.
Model II

Figure no. 3: PLS-SEM Measurement Model 2
Source: Results determined by the authors valuing the SmartPLS 3 software
As can be seen from Figure no. 3, all coefficients in the model are greater than 0.5, meaning
that they are significant and valid. Thus, the convergent validity of the model is conformed.

3.1.2. Discriminant validity
The AVE indicator can be used to verify the discriminatory validity of the model (Fornell
and Larcker, 1981). The authors consider that if the square values of the correlation
coefficients between the latent variables is less than the computed value of AVE (Table no.
4), the discriminant validity is confirmed.
Table no. 4: Correlation coefficients between the latent variables
Square of the corr. coefficients of the latent variables
Latent variables
AVE

Inov
Reglem
Knowledge
Prod
Motiv
INOV
1.000
1
REGLEM
1.000
.621
1
KNOWLEDGE
0.712
.679
.512
1
PROD
0.677
.528
.491
.531
1
MOTIV
0.651
.513
.324
.552
.621
Source: Data analysis was performed by the authors valuing SmartPLS 2.0 M3 software

1

By comparing the square of the correlation coefficients between the latent variables in the
model IU structural and indicator values AVE, discriminant validity is confirmed.

3.2. The structural model
The structural model (inner model) results from Figure No. 2 in which the relations (path)
of exogenous variables (latent) and endogenous (reflective) are described. The structural
equation (Zhang, 2009) of the model is as follows:
η= Γη+Λϕ+ψζ

(3)

where:
η - vector of latent endogenous variables;
ϕ - vector of latent exogenous variables;
ψ - vector of residual variables;
Γ and Λ - the path coefficient matrices.
The structural model is evaluated by the values of the coefficients and the R-square value
(R_squared). According to figure no. 3, the R-square value is 0.668, which means that
about 66.8 % of the variability of biomass producers' performance is explained by the
variability of the model. Moreover, the coefficient values of the structural model are all
positive, which means that the higher the values the latent variables have, the higher the
performance of the manufacturers. Of the five indicators, the variable with the greatest
impact is "performance of the production process" (factor 0.722), followed by "knowledge
and skills" (factor 0.648) and "innovation" (factor 0.641). Organizational performance with
the least impact is given by indicators "degree of regulation of the sector" (factor 0.567)
and "employee motivation" (factor 0.345).
Indicators reflect emerge of endogenous variable "performance producers of biomass" have
values over as 0.5. It follows that these variables in the reflective model (prod_var and
income_var) are statistically significant. The high values of the coefficients of the reflexive
variables, i.e. the "change in biomass production (factor 0.956) and the " rate of income
from the sale of production relative to operating costs" (factor 0.652) shows that the
performances of biomass producers are well represented by the two indicators. Multiple
factors, in general, increase reliability and improve the performance of the model compared
to the unique factors. In our model, the dependent variable is composed of two variables
that reflect economic performance, a financial variable, and the other operational variable.
In addition, a variable has a higher impact because it has high coefficient values reflecting
more powerful measurement paths. This is also underlined by the high values of the two
coefficients of endogenous variables.
Moreover, hypothesis testing their research described it above, it was made a Bootstrap test
on a sample of 300 respondents to generate t-values and standard deviations of the model
parameters. Bootstrapping allows the assignment of precision measurements to the sample
estimates. The results are presented in Table no. 5.

Hypothesis
H1:
INOV
->
Biomass
Performance
H2: REGLEM -> Biomass
Performance
H3: KNOWLEDGE -> Biomass
Performance
H4:
PROD
->
Biomass
Performance
H5: MOTIV -> Biomass
Performance
Note: *t-value 2.58 (sig. level = 5 %)

Prod
Prod
Prod
Prod
Prod

Path Coef.

Std.
Error

t-value*

P_value

0.643

0.224

3.823

0.013

0.562

0.369

2.701

0.035

0.684

0.172

3.289

0.027

0.754

0.131

2.368

0.039

0.222

0.248

1.234

0.282

Valid hypotheses are those with values of p-value less than 0.05, while the others with pvalues higher than 0.05 are not. Therefore, we can conclude that H1, H2, H3 and H4 are valid
hypotheses, while H5 is not. These results confirm the economic studies according to which
the innovation, the degree of regulation, the level of knowledge and skills and the
production process are significant factors for the performance of biomass producers
(Campbell et al., 2008; Cardenete et. al., 2014), but argues that motivation is an important
factor in the performance of biomass producers (Wagner, 1994; Lewandoski, 2015).
In conclusion, we can state that the degree of innovation, the level of regulation in the
sector, the level of knowledge and skills, the performance of the production process have a
positive impact on the performance of biomass producers in Romania.

Conclusions
Using economic modeling in the management of the transition to bioeconomy with SEMPLS structural equations, the paper identifies and then evaluates the relationship between
the determinant characteristics of the conceptual management model of the transition to
bioeconomy and the economic performance of the biomass production companies. The
results indicate that a significant proportion of variability of endogenous variables is
explained by exogenous latent variables.
The survey used in our research highlights that integrated business processes used by an
enterprise have a positive impact on performance and sustainable development. Important
factors that converge towards performance regarding innovation of the production process,
the level of knowledge and skills, the performance of the production process and the
motivation of employees. In this context, the significant contributions of management
processes (including surveillance and inspection) lead to an increase in motivation for the
transition to bio-economy of these corporations. This argues the high value of the processlevel coefficients of this model.
The econometric analysis has shown that the entrepreneurial confidence in government
policies for the development of bio-economy is very low. We also note that the principle of
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) remains an abstract concept without practical

application, as suggested by the modest results obtained for the human factor motivation
indicator.
The results of the behavioral model, analyzed through the structural equations modelling,
confirm the conclusions of the studies in the economic literature, emphasizing that
innovation, the level of regulation in the sector, the level of knowledge and skills and the
performance of the production process are determinants of the management of the transition
to the bioeconomy.
Some of the recommendations of the Bosman and Rotmans (2016) research study are fully
applicable to Romania as regards the need to develop public-private partnerships to meet
the needs of the transition to bioeconomy.
A limitation of this study is given by the relatively small number of respondents to the
survey and by the fact that the paper analyzes a single industry. Other limitations of this
research could be related to the subjective answers of the questioned persons and the
number of constructs and reflective variables. These limitations could be overcome in
future research by increasing the sample size and the number of constructs and reflective
variables, as well as introducing open questions in the questionnaire.
Additional studies in the field of bioeconomy transition on producer performance should be
extended to other sectors or industries, and research may, as such, include some likely
macroeconomic effects. The analysis could also be developed by analyzing how companies
in the industry have funded their efficiency towards a sustainable development of the
biomass sector.


