
corroded parts) or mechanical and electrical treatment (for example, building up worn
parts by metal spraying or welding). In the interest of economy, the process chosen for
the component remanufacturing program will depend on the type of product and the
volume of work involved. Subcontracting may be used to reduce costs or improve
product quality. Rebuilt parts which pass the appropriate mechanical and electrical
tests are labelled and put into parts inventory in stores. Generally the inventory record
does not differentiate between remanufactured parts stock and new purchased parts
because they are considered equal in quality. Replacements for items that must be
discarded are ordered from suppliers or made by the remanufacturer. These are also
put into the inventory stock.
5. Whole system remanufacture, Test and Despatch. Once all required components
are available in stores, assembly kits are prepared using an assortment of remanufactured, purchased and manufactured parts (as many remanufactures undertake some
basic manufacture for example to replenish parts that are no longer available in the
market) according to the production schedule. These kits are brought out to the assembly area as required for subassembly and final assembly. Assembly is followed by whole

typically painted and labelled in a way that clearly distinguishes it from a new product
from conventional manufacture. Finally the remanufactured product is given a guaranty
that is at least equivalent to that of a similar new product and is shipped to a customer
or else is put in finished goods stock to await purchase. The testing, measurement and
quality control methods used are similar to those employed during the original manufacture. The only difference is that in remanufacture inspection is much more rigorous
and in fact must be on a 100 % basis because in remanufacturing all parts are presumed
faulty until proven otherwise.
Remanufacturing is complicated by a variety of operations control issues described in
[18] and shown in Table 1, which also illustrates the importance that remanufacturing
companies place on the impact of uncertainty on their operations. Remanufacturing
companies have to manage uncertainties regarding when they will receive the cores
(time uncertainty), as well as the numbers involved (quantity uncertainty) and conditions (quality uncertainty). These uncertainties cause difficulties in remanufacturing
operations, particularly in the disassembly phase.

Remanufacturing disassembly
The disassembly process in remanufacturing is important for several reasons. Firstly it
is an initial remanufacturing activity and is also essential since remanufacturing cannot
occur without it. However, most products are designed to optimise assembly without
consideration to the need for easy and efficient disassembly in order to facilitate recovery of the product at end of life. Even when disassembly is possible it would not

necessarily be easy to undertake and in most cases is not optimised. As products are
not designed for ease of disassembly during remanufacturing, cores may become
defective in some way due to damage during the remanufacture process [39]. These circumstances present many challenges during the design of a viable recovery system [26].
Consequently, success in disassembly is a key success factor in remanufacturing operations [39]. Secondly, disassembly is the main gate for most information related to the
remanufacturing operations [13, 24] and information can be obtained here that would
be valuable in minimizing uncertainties in every phase of remanufacturing [8, 9].
Most studies depict disassembly as technical activities which break down cores into
component parts without considering other factors such as employee skills, tools,
equipment and product knowledge. Furthermore, the majority of the research utilise
positivist paradigms using operations research with strict assumptions. Most of the research focuses on remanufacturing operations particularly production planning and
control. Example here includes inventory control [15, 43], demand forecasting [35] and
production planning [32, 43] among others. However, there is a paucity of research
specifically on remanufacturing disassembly. Bras and McIntosh [3] suggest that research which investigates the practice of disassembly should cover organisational design, product characteristics and process design (see Fig. 2). By incorporating these
three factors, this research comprehensively analysed the disassembly operation as a
system. In this system, there is a start and end point that can be used as boundaries.
The starting point of the disassembly system in this case would be the point at which
the disassembly area receives information about the cores. As soon as this happens
facility set-up, tool selection, and job allocation can be carried out. The end point of
the disassembly system would be when the cores have been disassembled into components and the components have been put in their designated areas either for further
processing in remanufacturing operations, as stock, or for recycling. Boundaries and
coverage of activities in the disassembly system are important in understanding the
context in which the disassembly strategy is adopted.
Disassembly in the context of remanufacturing is embedded in a series of interrelated processes. The position of disassembly (strip core) within the process of remanufacturing was presented in Fig. 1 in previous pages. Uncertainties are frequently
mentioned as the main issue in every process of Remanufacturing, including disassembly [13]. The uncertainties in Disassembly can be divided into three different types.
These are: the uncertainties that exist Prior to disassembly, the uncertainties that happen during disassembly and the uncertainties that occur in other processes after




disassembly. This is presented in Table 2. These uncertainties interplay with one
another, and any failure to understand how these uncertainties interrelate would make
research into disassembly less relevant.

Research objectives
Remanufacturing studies should cover three areas namely, organisational design,
process design and product design Bras and McIntosh [3]. This is critical for a comprehensive investigation of the factors affecting disassembly operations. Of these three
areas, organisational design is the least investigated in the literature. One of the studies
focusing on this issue is Hermansson and Sundin [14] that found that inter-functional
communication across different departments, such as product design, logistics, remanufacturing and procurement, is important to manage uncertainties about the return
flow of the cores. However, the research gap to investigate organisational design with
product and process characteristics remains. Issues such as types of relationship with
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), employee skills [25] and information
regarding know-how about the products [12, 22] should also be covered.
Product characteristics are the most popular topic investigated in disassembly for
product recovery but few studies have been devoted to disassembly for remanufacturing. Most studies that investigate disassembly relate to recycling where destructive
Table 2 Uncertainties coming to and from disassembly
Uncertainties coming from processes Uncertainties that happen during
prior to disassembly
disassembly

Uncertainties in other processes
subsequent to disassembly

Customer order. Uncertainty
from customers involving number
and timing of order as well as
the types of products [18, 27].

The optimum level of disassembly.
The optimum level disassembly
that should be undertaken is
uncertain [28].

Purchasing of new parts. What
parts to order, how many and how
long the lead time is [8, 9]. These
decisions rely on the results from
disassembly.

Cores sorting. Sorting cores
reduces the quality uncertainty
but does not reduce the quantity
uncertainty. Thus, cores sorting
creates uncertainty in terms of
numbers of cores qualified for
disassembly [30].

Quantity of cores to disassemble
is uncertain. This decision is
related to product rebuild [10]
and optimisation of holding
costs of disassembled
components [29].

Product rebuild. There is a need
to match parts from disassembly,
inventory and new parts from
suppliers [9, 10].

Supply of cores. The uncertainties
predominantly come from outside
remanufacturers. These cover type
of cores, quality, quantity and time
of arrival. These uncertainties affect
almost all of the processes in
remanufacturing [23].

The sequence of disassembly.
The purpose of this decision is
to obtain the sequence with
the lowest cost [36, 37].

Routing of each parts during
testing, cleaning, and reprocessing.
Components from the disassembly
activity require different routes for
rework and reprocessing [13].

Which parts should be taken
out and which should not. This
decision aims to optimise cost
of disassembly [5], particularly in
selective and partial disassembly.

Product costing and selling price.
Costing [9] and selling prices
[41, 43, 44] of products
depend on the quality of
disassembled components.

What recovery method is suitable
for disassembled components?
There needs to be a justification as
to whether some components are
still viable for remanufacturing,
otherwise they will be recycled.

Number of inventory. This
involves inventory of
disassembled components
[9, 40] and remanufactured
products [4].

Disassembly yield. How much
recovered value of the cores would

disassembly methods are acceptable. Disassembly for remanufacturing is different from
that for other recovery operations because its resultant components should be viable to
be returned to as-new condition. Hence, process requirements in disassembly for remanufacturing are higher compared to disassembly for other types of recovery operations.
Based on the extant literature, we identify product characteristics that might affect
disassembly strategy including type of materials [19, 21, 33], product structures
[20, 38, 39], number of components [37], product variety [16], expected residual
value [45].
The factors affecting process design for remanufacturing found in literature and
considered for this study include tooling and equipment [34], employee skills, [1, 40],
facility planning [11], capacity management [11], and cores’ volume [43]. These factors
are interrelated and adoption of a particular factor may drive companies to implement
particular practices. Literature also shows that remanufacturing is a labour-intensive
industry that typically requires a greater ratio of low skilled workers in comparison to
conventional manufacturing, multi-purpose equipment and flexible scheduling. This
study investigated how remanufacturing companies manage these factors to develop
disassembly strategies. Based on the preceding discussion, the research question for this
study was: How do companies develop operations strategies for disassembly in
remanufacturing?
The following sections is organised as follows: firstly, the methodology will be
discussed and the case study companies described. This is followed by a cross case
analysis of the case companies to compare differences and similarities then the conclusions and findings from the literature and the case study will be presented. Finally, the
research limitations and future research will be outlined.

Methodology
This study investigated the research question proposed using a multiple case study
approach. Case studies are appropriate when phenomena and the context cannot be
investigated separately [46]. In addition, this method is suitable for analysing questions
of why and how related to contemporary events on which investigators have little
control [42, 46]. The multiple case study analysis involved three remanufacturing companies with different characteristics as presented in Table 5. Multiple case studies are
preferred to single ones as the former offers higher validity, reduces the tendency of
observer bias, and augments external validity [6, 42, 46]. Further, multiple case studies
may provide deeper understanding and richer information since it permits researchers
to undertake replication and pattern matching through cross case analysis [6, 46]. The
rationale for selecting the three companies is that they form a continuum from relatively simple to highly complex organisations. Based on a number of characteristics,
company A represents the simplest and company C the most complex organisation.
Information was collected through interviews with company managers since they are
the people responsible for managing disassembly activities. Shop floor visits, observations and document analysis were conducted not only to collect more information but
also as a means of triangulating information from interviews. If there were some
conflicting findings, further analysis was conducted until consensus was achieved. Triangulation using different information sources as utilized in this case study is proven to

focus of the research [46]. Although formally stating it does not influence the research
outcome, Barratt et al. [2] contend that the unit of analysis offers several advantages.
First, it helps researchers to identify literature that may assist in analysing the phenomena under study. Secondly, it helps researchers to understand how that phenomena is
linked to the broader body of knowledge. The product is selected as the unit of analysis
in this study as it enables investigators to identify patterns from the subjects. Too many
differences in the subjects will cause difficulties in identifying similar patterns while too
few leads to difficulties in conducting cross case analysis since all subjects would have
similar patterns [46].

Analysis and Findings/Results
Organisational design

In terms of organisational factors, the type of relationships with OEMs is one of the
most important because of its influences on other factors such as technical support
regards product knowledge, volume of incoming cores, and early information about the
cores. Of the three cases, Company C is in a better position compared to Companies B
and A because it is an OEM remanufacturer. Both Company B and A are not OEMs
but Company B develops contractual agreements with OEMs and receives higher support
from them regarding product technical knowledge. Company A also has contractual
agreements with OEMs but only for certain products.
Company C is more advanced than the other two cases in various ways. For example,
the company requires advanced and specialised knowledge due to the advanced technology of the products and this is almost impossible for independent remanufacturers
to acquire due to the high cost involved. In this company when an employee has not
used his capability for a certain period of time, the skill and knowledge involved are
classified as “expired”. This differs vastly from the situation in typical remanufacturing
companies where knowledge is hoarded long after it ceases to be useful in the organisation. Additionally, employees’ qualifications must comply with company policies as well
as those from regulatory bodies such as International Aviation Safety Association
(IASA) and Civil Aviation Authority (CAA).
At the other extreme, In Company A, the simplest of the three organisations
employees do not require formal training and education for their work and skills are
obtained through experience and coaching from longer serving peers. Workers here are
multi skilled to enable flexibility thus ability to switch from one task to another.
Company B requires slightly higher qualifications than Company A but is much less
advanced than Company C. Company B operates a structured job matrix with 3-1-3
scheme. In this scheme, there are at least three employees that can do every job and
each employee has 3 different skills to perform different jobs. This strategy allows a
higher level of flexibility than in Company A, but is still lower than that of Company C.
In industrial settings, OEMs have the highest access to customers and thus in obtaining cores in comparison to the other types of remanufacturing practitioners (contract
and independent). This fact was demonstrated in company C, an OEM remanufacturer.
Here, the supply of cores is stable so that the company is able to avoid idle capacity
due to lack of cores. In terms of product complexity, the jet engine is the most complex
of the three cases since it consists of thousands of different components with unique

many components that require particularly uncommon treatment and specific skills are
required to carry out those tasks.
Company A is a retail player with small production volumes based on direct orders
from customers. Although the company has contracts with industrial customers such
as insurance companies, taxi operators and OEMs, the majority of cores come directly
from customers. These circumstances lead to difficulties for the company in forecasting
the quantity, type and timing of incoming cores. Typically, production volume may be
in units rather than in batches due to the small number of incoming cores. When there
are no customer orders, cores from storage are processed in order to avoid potential future idle capacity by developing stocks of remanufactured or partially remanufactured
products.
In the case of Company B, a contract remanufacturer, production always starts after
orders from customers are received. Usually orders are in high volumes so that the
company can minimise fixed costs such as facility set up, tools and equipment preparations. Because of the high volume production runs, job specialisation can be organised
to a certain extent.
Process design

There are considerable differences in facilities set up between the three cases. Company
C has a large investment in its facility set up, both for physical and non-physical facilities such as R&D, training and employee certification. Even if the production volume
is not as high as that for the other two companies, the huge number of components
within jet engines leads to a very complex remanufacturing process. Company C uses a
product-oriented layout where different engines types are processed in different areas.
This strategy is adopted to ease identification and separation of components from
different engines. The main components that have a unique serial number on them
must be reassembled into the same engines. To avoid idle capacity, Company C relies
on robust forecasting and scheduling which is facilitated by, early product information
from the engine health management system.
On the other hand, Company A uses a common area, tools and equipment, and any
employees available to disassemble cores. This is due to the low level of its products’
complexity in comparison to the jet engines of Company C. The company carries out
full disassembly regardless of the conditions of cores. The production volume is small
and typically in units rather than in batches. To run production processes of small
volume and high fluctuation, the company employs multi skilled workers who have the
flexibility to easily switch between tasks to reduce the potential for idle capacity.
With regards to process design complexity, Company B occupies a position between
Company A and B. Like Company A, Company B performs full disassembly on all
received cores but with a more structured disassembly process. It has a research and
development team to design customised tools and equipment for different product
models. Different product models are disassembled in dedicated areas that are
equipped with customised tools and operated by employees with specific skills. As
stated by one of the respondents, “moving people is much easier than moving tools and
equipment”.
Company B undertakes sorting to identify obvious damage so that low quality cores

process helps the company to streamline remanufacturing operations included in the
disassembly stage. This process can run more smoothly without any disruptions as low
quality cores – typically requiring more work and special treatments are removed early
from processing.
Product characteristics

The expected residual value of components is another important factor in product
characteristics that distinguishes Company C from the other two companies. A jet engine consists of high value components that require specific skills to perform particular
treatments for particular components. The high value of jet engine components comes
from two sources: (1) the type of materials to make the components, and (2) the manufacturing process of the components. The main material in a jet engine is titanium, a
precious, light, strong metal, which is expensive and hence brings considerable costs to
the complicated process of building the engine. Some of these high value components
require extremely specialist treatments by experts in isolated laboratories.
Products remanufactured at Companies A and B have similarities and dissimilarities.
The number of components in products in Company B is similar to those in Company
A but there is greater product variation in the former. The number of components in a
gearbox, transmission and automotive engine is considered moderate in comparison to
simpler products such as printer cartridges that are popular for remanufacturing. Company B has higher production capacity, newer product types and a higher variety of
product types to remanufacture. The combination of these factors makes the disassembly operations for company B more complicated than that for company A. However,
company B has more stable core supply in comparison to Company A due to its contractual relationships with OEMs. Product types that are remanufactured in Company
B are also more ‘state-of-the-art’ in comparison to Company A which remanufactures
any model of gear box regardless of its year of production.
In general, profit margins per unit of product in Company A are higher than that in
Company B because each customer has different service requirements. For example if
the company were to service the transmission of a 1970’s car, the necessary equipment
and components may no longer be available in the market and OEMs may no longer
manufacture the product. The company must thus make the component itself or commission others to do so on its behalf and then charge the customer a premium price.
For orders that come from OEMs, both company A and company B earn similar profit
per unit of product but the quantity of orders in Company B is much greater than that
for Company A.
Grouping the factors that affect disassembly

A total of 16 factors were identified from the empirical evidence thus too many to
consider individually during this analysis due to time constraints. They were thus
grouped based on their relationship in order to simplify the analysis because it is difficult to develop a framework of disassembly strategies that is based on a large number
of factors due to the problems during the analysis. Moreover, an analysis that uses each
individual factor separately will not result in comprehensive conclusions. Also not all
the case companies have the factors that were identified in the empirical findings.

multidimensional constructs, consisting of different factors for product complexity and
stability of core supply, will result in a more comprehensive analysis. In this research
the factors that refer to the same construct were all grouped into one category. The
grouping of the constructs is important to ensure that they are conceptually interrelated [7]. After this categorisation, there were eleven factors in the product complexity
category, while the stability of core supply consists of five factors (Fig. 3).
Tables 3 and 4 present the logical relationships of how each dimension and the main
factors (i.e., product complexity and the stability supply of cores) are interrelated. The
main aim of the table is to demonstrate that the dimensions are related to the main
factors. To emphasise the argument of how each dimension is related to the main
dimensions (i.e., the stability supply of cores and product complexity), the phrases that
are related to the main dimensions in the cells are written in bold and italic.
Discussion on disassembly strategies

From the foregoing discussion, it can be seen that remanufacturers use different
schemes, (for example worker flexibility, specialised tools and equipment and rigid
production schedules), to organise their disassembly systems. In general, the factors affecting a disassembly system can be classified into two broad categories: product complexity
and stability of core supply as shown in Fig. 3. The product, process and organisational
factors that affect disassembly strategies fall into these two camps Table 5.
The Strategies adopted in the three case companies can be summarised as in Fig. 4.
Company A which is located at the bottom-left adopts opposite strategies to that of
company C which is at the top-right of the figure. Company C is an OEM and uses a
product-service system approach. Under this system, the ownership of the cores
remains with the company and the customers pay the company based on its accessing
of the services of the company’s product (e.g., power-by-the hour) - very much like a
lease arrangement. The benefits of this system includes the company having better
information regarding the condition of the cores, for example when the cores need to
recovered and which parts need to be replaced.
There are some exceptions to these findings in the literature. Theoretically, to adopt


Table 3 Grouping of dimensions into stability of core supply
Number

(CODE) Factors

Relationship with stability supply of cores
Positive

Negative
Company A, which is an
independent remanufacturer,
does not have permanent
core suppliers and this has a
negative effect on the
stability supply of cores.

1.

(OC1) Degree
of the relationship
with the OEMs

Both Company D and E are OEMs.
Their status as OEMs, which are
combined with leasing agreements,
results in the strongest relationship
with customers, which eventually
leads to a more stable supply of cores.
Contract relationships offer advantages
to the stable supply of cores as well,
but to a lesser degree. The relationships
ensure that remanufacturers always
have a supply of cores from OEMs.
Contract relationships, which were
found in Company B and C, come next.

2.

(OC2) Company size
of the remanufacturer

The bigger the size of the
remanufacturer, the more stable the
supply of cores needs to be and the
higher the volumes of cores. A bigger
company typically has more automated
processes, so that a more stable supply
of cores is needed to avoid the high
cost of idle capacity. This was found in
Company A, which is the smallest
company and has the least stable cores
supply, while Company E has the most
stable supply of cores.

3.

(OC4) Cores sorting

Core sorting is related to the stable
supply of cores, for both the disassembly
shop floor and overall remanufacturing
operations. Companies B and C, which
receive a more stable supply of cores,
prefer to arrange sorting to avoid low
quality cores being disassembled. As a
result of this sorting, the cores that arrive
in the disassembly facility are more
standardised and, consequently, the cores
flow more smoothly compared to those
without sorting.

4.

(PC1) MTO versus MTS

MTS can be used to reduce idle capacity
due to fluctuating demand from
customers and a low stability supply of
cores. To overcome this low stability of
supply of cores, Company C
remanufacture cores that are available
in the inventory as part of a production
levelling strategy.

5.

(PC2) Volume of cores
supply

A high volume of cores supply can be
used for production levelling, so that
cores that arrive at the disassembly
facility are more stable. Some of the
excess cores can be used as stocks and
will be used later when the company has
a low supply of cores. Both Company A
and C adopt this production levelling
method.

Companies adopting MTO
are more likely to have a
fluctuating supply of cores,
due to uncertainty about orders
from customers. The evidence
is most apparent in Company A,
whose production is mainly
MTO and whose orders
come from individual customers.

in remanufacturing. High product complexity, high value materials, and high numbers

Page 12 of 16

Table 4 Grouping of dimensions into product complexity
Number (CODE) Factors

Relationship with product complexity
Positive

1.

2.

(OC5) Product
information database

A product information database could
be used to support the parts explosion
that happens during the physical
disassembly activities of products with a
high numbers of components. The higher
the number of components, the higher
the need for the database because more
complex products typically have a higher
number of components. The use of a
database to support the remanufacturing
of complex products is found in both
Company D and E.

3.

(PC3) Multi-purpose
versus specialised
tools and equipment

Specific tools and equipment are needed
to disassemble complex products.
The use of inappropriate tools can
potentially cause damage, and reduce
the potential reclaimed value. The
evidence for this was found in
Company E.

4.

(PC4) Specific versus
general skills

Complex products demand a higher
qualification of skills and knowledge to
disassemble. In complex products, various
components in different sizes, shapes and
materials require different tools to
disassemble. The tools and equipment
require specific skills to operate.

5.

(PC5) Value of
recovered products

Negative

(OC2) Information
Products with high complexity are more
transfer from the OEM difficult to disassemble, when there is no
support from OEMs that possess product
knowledge. For this reason, complex
products are disassembled and
remanufactured in house by OEMs.
Company E is a good example of this
phenomenon.

Products with a high complexity require
expensive advanced manufacturing
processes. At the end of their life, these
products still contain a high recovery
value. As a result, although the products
have been used, the remaining value is
still considerably high.

In Company A, multi-skilled
employees used multi-purpose
tools and equipment to
disassemble cores with a less
complex product structure. The
employees used tools that can
be obtained from the market
and equipment that can be
used for different product types.
Multi-purpose equipment does
not function properly in complex
products that require specific
tooling.

As can be seen from Fig. 4, both Company A and B remanufacture similar types of
products but Company B has some advantages over Company A. The former can use a
disassembly facility with some degree of specialisation in terms of employee skills,
tools, equipment and facility. This is largely due to high production volume minimising
the financial impact of the large fixed costs from setting up a more specialised disassembly facility. For example, to set up a typical shop floor facility for company B
requires an investment of approximately 5000 GBP in fixed cost which will be spread


Table 5 Summary of cross case comparison
Company A

Company B

Company C

Organisational design
Number of
employee

35

75

625

Relationship
with OEMs and
cores sourcing

A contract remanufacturer
for some products but most
of the cores come from
individual customers

A contract remanufacturer,
all cores are supplied by
OEMs who are also the
customers

An OEM, company obtain
cores as part of product
service system offered to
customers

Stable supply
of cores

Relatively low stability,
majority of cores
comes directly from
individual customers.

High stability due to the
high volume of cores
storage

High stability as it is part
of product service system

Support from
Does not receive support
OEMs regarding from OEM but develop
knowledge based on
experience

Obtains support from
OEM regarding know-how
the products

Possesses knowledge and
information regarding
know how of the products

Employee
• Informal training through
qualifications
coaching and experience
and knowledge
acquisition
• Multiple skills to carry
out different tasks

• Mechanical degree or some
working experience would
be an advantage.

Requires formal education
background, training,
experience and
professional certification

• Employees are encouraged
to be flexible workers

• Moderate level of job
specialisation; the
company adopts 3-1-3 policy

Process design
Facility layout

Single facility for all types
of transmissions and
gearboxes

Shop floor is organised into
several categories

Each shop floor is
designated for specific
different product type

Tools and
equipment
management

Generic tools and
equipment that can be
obtained from the market

Specific tools and equipment
Specific tools for different
that are customised for different types of components and
products to allow employees
products
to work faster

Level of
disassembly

Full disassembly

Full disassembly

Strategy to
minimise
idle capacity

Cores from storage are
Job rotations between different
processed in case there is
jobs and different products
no order from the customer

Robust production
scheduling and
forecasting

Operations

Focus on remanufacturing
torque, gear box and
transmission in small
volumes.

Remanufacture gear box,
transmission and car engine

Focus on remanufacturing
jet engine as part of repair,
maintenance and overhaul.

Number of
components

Moderate, 100+

Moderate, 100+

High, 30,000-40,000
components depends
on the engine types

Volume of
production

Approximately 5000 units
per year

Approximately 18,000 units
per year

Approximately 360 units
per year

Product variety

Higher than company B.
Company remanufacture
any cores regardless of
the types and models

Lower than company A. Only
gearbox, transmission and
engines for products that are
still produced by OEMs

Five types of jet engines

Partial and selective
disassembly

Product design

higher fixed cost due to the cost of setting up its shop floor facilities which will be used
for a long time whereas Company A incurs higher expenses for variable costs mainly in

Fig. 4 Summary of disassembly strategies

hence flexible workers so that resources are shared by transferring employees between
different tasks. Conversely, for remanufacturers that disassemble complex products but
have with steady core supplies, utilising workers with specific skills would be a preferred option. This does not mean that companies positioned in the top right corner do
not need multiple skilled workers and those in the bottom-left corner do not require
specialised skilled workers. Any company regardless of its position in Fig. 4 needs these
different types of skills but in different combinations [14].
Similar to conventional manufacturing, remanufacturing companies adopt different
capabilities to face competitors within their industry. Flexibility is an important capability in order to enable remanufacturers to disassemble various product types [31]. This
capability is important for companies located in the left-bottom corner of the graph
whereas companies positioned on the right-top corner rely on fixed cost minimisation
through rigid production schedule, idle capacity minimisation and streamlining production flows.

Limitation and future research
This study investigates three companies, two from the automotive industry and one
from the aerospace industry. Future studies could cover broader industries with different characteristics so that more patterns of strategies are identified and generalisation
of findings improved. In addition, further investigations will be carried out regarding
whether there are any specific competitive priorities for remanufacturers and how disassembly strategies are related to the competitive priorities. Moreover this research will
be built on to develop a new remanufacturing process model that for the first time
comprehensively considers the needs and potential of disassembly. This development


