
Introduction

The European Union is the biggest donor of development aid in the world and has pledged that
it will be willing to collaborate and provide support as long as needy states require it. We chose to
study this topic because we believe it is an issue of major importance by the fact that EU development
policy concerns not only space but also that of European third countries, which gives it worldwide
notoriety. Policy Development Department is not only economic development, this means
development and progress in all social levels taking into account the political, technological, political
and economic. The welfare and world peace are closely related to a continuous and uniform
development, not only in Europe, not just in America but also around the globe.
European Union (EU) is unique. It is not a federal state like the United States of America
because its member countries remain independent sovereign nations. EU does not fit it a purely
intergovernmental organization like the United Nations because the member countries do pool some
of their sovereignty - in this way, collective power and influence far greater than if it were acting on
own. They pool their sovereignty by taking joint decisions shared institutions such as the European
Parliament, which is elected by EU citizens, and the Council, which represents national government.
They decide on the proposals presented by the European Commission, which represents the interests
of the EU as a whole. States were the main actors of the global system for more than 200 years. “The
cooperation and conflict, as well as fluctuations in the balance of powers between and within states.”
(McCormick, 2006, p.1)
The European Union could be a model to determine the final disappearance of the state system
and its substitution by a new community centers and stronger political and economic networks. Union
is more than just a common international organization because it has more power over its members
but is not yet a state or a super state. The European Union is a voluntary association of countries
where decisions are taken as a result of negotiations between the leaders of the member. International
cooperation has resulted in the development of many methods and systems for promoting
cooperation. The most common aspect was the creation of international organizations. "International
organizations are gatherings in which governments meet, share opinions, negotiate and reach
agreements." (McCormick, 2006, p.5). Organizations do not have the authority to implement its
decisions, may not impose penalties or other sanctions to their members than those agreed upon by
all members.
The power that holds enforceable EU and its institutions have a low degree of independence,
their task is mainly Member States' targets. Its institutions have the authority to legislate policies that
are binding on Member States, European law precedence over national laws. The European Union
has created internal single market through a system of laws and regulations guaranteeing the freedom
of movement of persons, services and capital goods. He developed common policies on trade,
agriculture, and fishing. It also took steps to implement a European policy for European development.
European Union (EU) is a family of democratic European countries working together to improve life
for their citizens and to build a better world. Family squabbles and occasional crises are headlines,
but away from the cameras the EU is actually a remarkable success story. In just half a century, the
EU has brought peace and prosperity in Europe, a single European currency (euro) and a "single
market" without frontiers in which the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital. The
European Union has become a major trading power and a world leader in fields such as environmental
protection and development aid. No wonder that the number of Member States increased from 6 to
28.

1. Globalization counteracts European Union game

As globalization has become a reality of the contemporary world, it has become the most

globalization means. Usual sense of the concept of globalization focuses on what is the general
condition of globality, or the universe of meanings irradiated by globalism. If the state of globality is
about universal issues, such as underdevelopment, poverty or social pendant, with no international
regime failed to provide operational solutions. As for globalism, it expresses a stage of evolution in
which an actor interdependency of international life has a leading role in the management of the
planet's resources. (Cojocaru, 2009, p.4). Overlapping sense of globalization on the state of globality,
send this concept in the category of those who always accompanied confronting humanity with itself:
what is, what it is, what can do and how he manages to do.
Essentially, „globalization is the process of functionalization, on the basis of global economic
competition, which in the global society, national post type, is able to create structures of decision
and action on global-local relationship, to solve global problems and balancing supply-justification.
Thus, globalization means removing borders, increased cross-border trade and investment regulation,
global products and global customers, global competition and global standards”. (Jones, p.1) If
globalization understood as interconnectivity can say that is morally neutral, the situation is different
in terms of global capitalism. Supporters estimate that globalization help developing countries and
emerging through access to markets, access to capital, information and technology. From the above,
„globalization is perceived as inadequate two ways: a new concept that enhances continuity
modalities of control of variables general problems and that an acceptable solution jams
understanding of limiting access through power in the international system” (Cojocaru, 2009, p.4).
Globalization is a new formulation of world organization in order to solve an otherwise nonconfrontational, resource allocation, as well as development issues that have not been solved in
principle adversity. As a result, globalization, say some, „may be best seen as a process or set of
processes than a single state. This does not reflect a simple single linear logic development and
anticipates no society or world community” (Held et al. 2004, p. 46). Globalization is associated
mainly with a global structure, dynamics, evolution, facilitation and constraint.
Globalization has affected the character of population mobility and international migration: the
processes of globalization reshape economies, political systems and cultural parameters, resulting in
„massive, hard-to-categorise, contemporary migration, often with oscillatory flows between
unexpected locations of turbulent waves, with hierarchy of eddies and vortices”. (Held et al. 2004, p.
50). Further, communications systems and infrastructure development enables people to commute
between home countries and destination countries, or within countries, without pressure for

1.1. The siege on the EU economy

The European Union plays an increasingly important role on the international stage, especially
in relations Econimic, where negotiate and conclude international agreements. Foreign trade is also
subject to a common policy, common commercial policy replacing the action of Member States. The
EU has a special responsibility in terms of economic assistance, coordinates the development and
humanitarian aid sectors that leads and coordinates a complementary policy of member states.
However EU intervention is less important in traditional areas of foreign policy making, such as
defense and security are properly addressed at the national or intergovernmental. Without a doubt,
the EU must play a political role more complex and integrate more closely with the global Cold War.
Further EU must strengthen its global presence and to respond more quickly and effectively in the
events that occur frequently, theme that the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) approved
in Maastricht, addresses only a part.
The EU is the most important commercial alliance in the world economically due to the success
of foreign trade and investment. EU direct investment in third countries is an important element in
the global economy, since it holds more than a quarter of foreign direct investment worldwide. EU
economic well-being depends on a free and multilateral economic order. The gradual opening its own
markets to facilitate agreement with third countries are some of the main objectives of the EU.
However, the EU has a very high tax on imports from other countries and in accordance with World
Trade Organisation (WTO) is to defend their industry against unfair competition third countries. The
EU uses trade defences instruments available but requires several steps, the minimum necessary to
compensate for the damage, but did not take any action if imports are favourable for the global
community. One of the important questions which must be given the answer is: Why a body like the
European Union to have a supra-regional power? „Four major arguments are typically offered to
justify the existence of a separate EU regional policy:” (Burtea, 2005, p.161-162).
1. First, the European Union considers that the effectiveness of regional policies of the Member
States can be improved by ensuring focus available funds where they are most needed, namely in the
most disadvantaged regions of Europe.
2. Secondly, the European Union fulfils a coordinating role. It may coordinate the regional
policies of member states to prevent excessive external competition among European countries for
mobile foreign investment for development projects. It is also necessary to coordinate their policies

3. Third common interest argument is used to ensure social unity within the Union, considering
unacceptable the existence of major imbalances in terms of unemployment or income.
4. Finally, the most important justification for a separate regional policy at EU level is dynamic
argument which states that regional imbalances can be a major barrier to deepening integration.
A key concern in the design of regional incentive policy is the designation of those problem
areas to be allocated to aid in this form. In choosing these areas, member states do not have complete
freedom. The regions designated by them shall not fall within the eligibility criteria call, but to achieve
acceptance Directorate for Competition Policy of the European Commission. The experience of the
European Union emphasized that the most important tool that can help achieve regional programs is
a Regional Development Fund (RDF). He has created on the basis of co-meaning participation in its
implementation, government funding, private and international.
„The European Union is presented as a puzzle of regions in very different stages of economic
development, there are significant discrepancies even within Member States, coexisting prosperous
regions with the poorest regions, and in this context, decentralization of regional policy at European
level would lead to disputes between regions and countries, a dangerous competition for allocation
of funds, net disadvantage poorer regions and countries” (Marchis, 2009, p. 62). Numerous studies
on the EU assumes that this is a „sui generis system of governance” (Walles et. al 2005, p. 26), but a
variant of the existing political systems. Another is the assumption that international actors have fixed
preferences determined exogenously and act sistemetic to maximize these preferences within the
constraints of the EU institutional system. Even the concept of the founders of the European Union
shows that a level of development close to the community members that would automatically involve
living standards area for members of these communities would be a key element for ensuring the
stability of relations of good understanding and to avoid potential conflicts. The world economy is
already constituted by the many functional and integrated regional markets in a global market.
Regions offers small national economies necessary to increase market critical mass of production and
sales to become competitive. On the other hand, „regionalization creates a unit capable of effective
trade policy protectionism and uncertainties beyond restraint on free trade. It create an entity capable
of reciprocity, and reciprocity is the only trade policy capable of operate in a world that is able to
operate effectively in a world characterized by aggressive trade” (Rosca, 2005, p.103).
2. Development policy remains the European Union's stake

growth, but nowadays it is recognized that this is not the only area it describes. So far the average
income per capita were the most important part of development and progress. Even if it is an important
indicator for ordinary people relate to areas such as health, education and security. The social
development has rapidly grown over time, when compared with industrial and professional. Creating
organizations can facilitate mutually beneficial exchanges, given the cost-benefit calculation in a
particular international context.
The essential difference between social development model and other models is that former
models represent general interests of social groups and emphasizes capital aspect of technological
progress, while the latter takes into account the interests of industry. Comprehensive development
project faces new challenges highlighted in the energy trade, climate change and food crisis. Their
interdependence creates a powerful moment in world history in which analysts and practitioners
seeking solutions episteme limited by narrow market. This contribution argues that official
development pleading for natural market solutions, refurbishes solution of the problem – „a problem
rooted in the geopolitics of a "gap metabolic" unsustainable global ecology and global discourse
global power strengthening international relations through monetary and deepening debt rating
Nordic eco.” (McMichael, 2009, p.247). The climate is a product of market development in many
ways. Earth's atmosphere is heating up as a result of market infrastructure based global fossil fuel
consumption. Since the market has become synonymous with development, is the answer to climate
change solutions in the market.
Development is not a right. Rather it is a goal. „Climate development combines a footprint that
defines relations between north and south with a market trajectory exploiting build relationships that
called green. In the haze of prosperity promises of market developments, the impact on climate
development took some time to be taken seriously.” (Roberts, 2007, p.25). The problem also defines
development and human development, development of a new generation. The strength of the lasting
development of the state is the system which is based on a competitive accumulation - according to
the legitimacy of government, military and security - and the national currency stability through
mechanisms such as trade, finance debt repayment and liberalizing its economic laws.
A number of combinations are "toxic" to the existence of a paradigm of development. „The first
paradigm takes into account environmental externalities. Secondly, the draft global development is
anchored in the nation-state system, which requires states and UN multilateral development agencies
to define and further develop the accumulation of positive measures. Third, while all states are equal,

responsible for climate change to be most vulnerable to its effects. Fifth, the industrial technology
relations (and military) - such as transportation of fossil fuels, widely exploited to resources contribute in a variety of ways”. (Rostow, 1960, p.36). Criticism scientists on development are those
that offer alternative positions and programs involving apparently unjustified growth consulting.
Donors are increasingly interested in funding initiatives that provide a long-term perspective on social
change within ongoing development. However, the issue of non-state actors should always be present
if it is to be a real opportunity for social development contexts.
European Union and International Development „is a valuable addition to the existing literature
because it develops an analytical model to explain the Commission's role vis-a-vis the Member States
of the European Union's decision-making process” (Abingdon, 2007, p.37). International politics is
the realm of competition between rival political groups, most notably the state. The state is not the
only international actor, but by far the most important compared with other powerful states that
establish the context and rules for other actors including the EU. „The EU is not a sovereign actor,
but acting as a vehicle for collective interests of Member States” (Waltz, 1979, p.94).
Over the last decade, the EU has served as the international repository for concerns of Member
States. Member States shall see the EU as a force for good in the world, committed to promoting the
common European political values such as democracy and human rights. Aligning the objectives of
EU development objectives achieved consists efficiency of EU action. „Failure objectives can
question the continued funding by the EU for raw RRF development, leading to the withdrawal of
the application of the EU to be a major player in world international influences development”
(Holland, 2008, p. 338). As strongly supported Woods' „development assistance that prioritizes
human development goals is in danger, a rapid increase in aid was channelled to address the new
security imperative" (Woods, 2005, p.227). To move forward, the EU has traded autonomy for
development policy in the hope of more effective collaboration with other global players. While this
can create tension with EU foreign policy, however aspirations to be a global actor autonomous in
terms of beneficiary states such global consistency is welcome and long overdue.

Conclusions

European Union's success is due, largely, its operation unusual. Unusual because the countries
that make up the EU ("Member States") remain independent sovereign nations, but sovereignty in

between governments, like the United Nations. In fact, the EU is unique. In practice pooling
sovereignty means that the member states delegate some decision-making powers to shared
institutions they have created, so that decisions on specific matters of joint interest can be made
democratically at European level. The unique character of international development policy of the
European Union, with bilateral and multilateral dimensions, received special attention from critics.
Most of the existing studies have focused on the policies and programs of the European Commission
without trying to provide comprehensive conceptual models to analyse interactions between the
European Commission and Member States development policy arena.
At the core of EU development policy are trade and humanitarian aid. Development policy
came into being as an expression of the desire of the European Union to assume its role as an
important player internationally, by helping the least developed countries to fight poverty and
integrate into world trade. The EU's development cooperation foster: sustainable economic and social
development of developing countries, their smooth and gradual integration of developing countries
into the world economy, fighting poverty in developing countries. Union policy in this area
contributes to the general objective of developing and consolidating democracy, the rule of law and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. EU countries coordinate their policies on
development cooperation and contribute to the implementation of the Community aid.
„ It can be said that the objectives of development policy in Europe, consistent and targeted,
can be discussed in Europe at different territorial levels” (Iuhas, 2004, p. 56). First there is an EU
approach which sets out the principles and objectives of regional development policy supra-national,
aimed at increasing economic and social cohesion. „The role of states in regional policy has been
gradually reduced their intervention being replaced by "economic liberalization policies, regulation
and privatization; direct support by state companies was replaced by indirect forms of assistance,
particularly by reducing the level of taxation and support for training, consultancy and innovation”
(Institul European, 2002, p.59). The desire for peace, determined action on regional integration, the
process by which countries were giving barriers in the way of free trade and free movement of people
across national borders. Development of the European Union is one of these actions has evolved the
most and that brought the biggest changes to its citizens.

Woods, N. (2005), The shifting politics of foreign aid, International Affairs, Cambridge University
