Introduction
The recent bioeconomy move originated in the interest manifested at the beginning of the
1970s for research on biotechnologies and the work on bioeconomics by, for example,
Nicolae Georgescu-Roegen (Gowdy and Mesner, 1998; Mayumi, 2009; Birner, 2018), and
got an important boost through the policies recently pursued by the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the European Commission (EC)
(Mayumi, 2009; Birch and Tyfield, 2012). The analysis of the significance of the concept
shows a shift from the perspective of resource substitution to the biotechnology innovation
perspective (Birner, 2018). Despite some recent critiques, as exemplified by the
“fetishization of all things bio” (Birch and Tyfield, 2013, p. 301), the international support
of those concepts is currently overwhelming, and an increasing number of entities started
complying to such international policies, agreements and recommendations (OECD, 2009;
European Commission, 2012; Purkus, et al., 2018). Several current challenges of the twentyfirst century, such as fossil resources and climate change, bio-based resources, planetary
boundaries and limitation of natural resources, as well as population growth and food security
are addressed by the bioeconomy, in its capacity of “sustainable and innovative use of
biomass and biological knowledge to provide food, feed, industrial products, bioenergy and
ecological and other services” (Lewandowski, et al., 2018, p. 14).
In this context, intellectual capital (IC) plays an important role in ensuring the development
of bioeconomic projects. The extent and speed of innovation depend on an effective
knowledge base and on the importance of IC in organizations. IC growth has the potential of
contributing to developments in the bioeconomy field through increased innovation abilities
developed as a result of intensified IC investments. Innovative capacities will result in
opportunities to create new products, services or work practices (Van de Ven, 1986).
Given the importance of IC for bio-economy, we aim to investigate in this paper the existence
and evolution of organizational bioeconomic practices of a company from the oil and gas
industry, and to explore how IC is employed to support these actions. Following
recommendations by current IC research (Dumay and Garanina, 2013), the emphasis is not
on measuring IC, but on investigating its implications and importance within an organization.
To that end, and as a contribution, we apply the theoretical lens proposed by Bugge, Hansen
and Klitkou (2016) to uncover how the focus of bioeconomic projects may have evolved over
time. The framework comprises three types of vision pertaining to sustainability projects:
bio-technology, bio-resources and bio-ecology.
We mobilize for our analysis the case of OMV Group (hereafter referred to as either OMV
or the Group), a major international player in the oil and gas industry, as an illustration of
how global organizations respond to and develop projects in line with the bioeconomic global
orientation. We perform a manual content analysis of seven Sustainability Reports (SR)
issued by the Group between 2010 and 2016, and look specifically at nine bioeconomy
projects launched over the period.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 1 presents a review of the
relevant literature on bioeconomy and IC, and the theoretical framework of our research.
Section 2 details the research methodology and presents the case organization, while Section
3 presents our results and discussions analysis. We finally conclude and present the paper’s
contributions to literature.

1. Review of the scientific literature
1.1. What is bioeconomy?
Recent concerns in the bioeconomics sphere have crystallized in the second half of the 20 th
century, an important precursor of the movement being Nicolae Georgescu-Roegen (Gowdy
and Mesner, 1998; Mayumi, 2009; Birner, 2018). Since then, becoming a sustainable and
equitable society has become a major concern for governments, public institutions,
businesses and individuals (Heijman, 2016). This need has been fueled by the growing effects
of globalization, population growth and concerns about climate and environmental change
(Aquilani, et al., 2018).
Globalization has had, over the past decades, an extensive impact over countries, institutions,
business and individuals and it has led to the development of new technologies and processes
(Pop and Valeriu, 2015; Lehtonen and Okkonen, 2016). Moreover, given the impact that
globalization has on the environment, sustainability concerns were raised. Thus, the
sustainability concept has become one of the most pressing challenges of our century, being
a keyword in the global research and political agendas for decades (D’Amato, et al., 2017).
There are many movements in the area of sustainability, such as circular economy, green
economy and bioeconomy.
The European Commission defines bioeconomy as an “economy that encompasses the
production of renewable biological resources and their conversion into food, bio-based
products and bio-energy. It includes agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and pulp and paper
production, as well as parts of chemical, biotechnological and energy industries” (European
Commission, 2012, p. 5). Other definitions of bioeconomy exist in various sectors (i.e. biofuels – Scarlat, et al., 2015; bio-technologies – OECD, 2009; reduced emissions and the use
of fossil fuels – Philip, 2015). Bioeconomy is a branch of green economy that the European
Commission has included at the core of its long-term strategy towards 2050. The concept is
centered on the usage of renewable raw materials and application of research, development
and innovation, and industrial biotechnology (Scarlat, et al., 2015). It also allows the use of
available biological resources more effectively than before by innovative methods and to
supplement their fields of application on the basis of new scientific knowledge and findings.
Industrial applications include the use of biotechnological processes to produce chemicals,
plastics, and enzymes, environmental applications such as bioremediation and biosensors,
methods to reduce the environmental effects or costs of resource extraction, and the
production of biofuels (OECD, 2009).
The academic literature followed this trend, and a significant number of studies on
bioeconomic issues were conducted to better explain the various aspects of this concept,
ranging from social sciences to chemistry, from international and national economy to
commodity science (Heijman, 2016; Aquilani, et al., 2018). There is however scope in
expanding this literature given the political importance of this concept and its emerging
nature over time. For example, more studies are needed to reflect on how organizations in
various domains respond to this global trend.

1.2. How can intellectual capital mediate the outcome of bioeconomy practices?
IC entails a set of knowledge resources used by companies in order to create corporate value
(Roos and Roos, 1997; Abhayawansa and Guthrie, 2010; IIRC, 2013) and gain competitive
advantage (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998; Youndt, Subramaniam and Snell, 2004;
Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005; IIRC, 2013). The relationship between IC and a company’s
ability to innovate has also been widely investigated (Ahuja, 2000; Subramaniam and
Venkatraman, 2001; McAdam, 2002; Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005). A causal
relationship has been established between the two concepts, as innovation entails the
identification of potential opportunities to create new products, services or work practices
(Van de Ven, 1986) while IC facilitates the achievement of these objectives (Ahuja, 2000;
Subramaniam and Venkatraman, 2001; Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005). In this view, for
companies involved in research and development (R&D) and innovation activities, it
becomes relevant to use the SR and other corporate channels to report on IC as a sign of their
innovative actions and a signal of the future development of the organization.
The existing literature identified three IC components namely, the human, the organizational
and the social capital (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998; Youndt, Subramaniam and Snell, 2004;
Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005). Recent studies (Dumay, 2009; Dumay and Garanina, 2013;
Cuozzo, et al., 2017) show that, although there are dozens of classifications of IC components
in literature, this tripartite analysis (that is, human, organizational and social capital) is widely
accepted. Furthermore, these studies recommend a more in-depth analysis of IC and its
components in organizations. The primary source of human capital are the employees with
their associated knowledge, skills, abilities and motivations to innovate (Subramaniam and
Youndt, 2005; Beattie and Smith, 2013; IIRC, 2013; Melloni, 2015; IIRC, 2013). The
organizational capital includes elements such as manuals, databases, patents, copyrights,
software, structures, systems, procedures and protocols (Youndt, Subramaniam and Snell,
2004; Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005; Cabrita and Vaz, 2006; Melloni, 2015; Subramaniam
and Youndt, 2005; Beattie and Smith, 2013; IIRC, 2013; Melloni, 2015). In turn, the social
capital comprises the knowledge resources linked to interactions among individuals such as
customers, suppliers or R&D partners (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998; Subramaniam and
Youndt, 2005; Beattie and Smith, 2013; Melloni, 2015; Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005) and
the trust and loyalty resulted from these relationships (IIRC, 2013).
However, these aspects of IC are not independent and they should be assessed according to
their inherent characteristics. While the individual knowledge associated with human capital
can change as a result of employees’ mobility, the organizational capital is static, being
preserved within the company (Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005). In a similar vein, the social
capital, which includes a network of individuals cannot be easily impacted by the changes in
specific individual actors (Bourdieu, 1985). Moreover, while organizational knowledge is
generally bounded within a set of rules and procedures that tend to follow a predetermined
pattern, social capital entails a flexible exchange of knowledge (Kostova and Roth, 2003;
Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005). As a result, these intangible resources are dynamic and
tend to complement each other: the human capital facilitates knowledge creation by giving
rise to unique ideas, the organizational capital facilitates the storage and dissemination of
knowledge resources throughout the company (Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005; Cabrita and
Vaz, 2006) and the social capital enhances the abovementioned roles by facilitating the
collaboration of individuals both within and between organizations (Subramaniam and
Youndt, 2005; Melloni, 2015).
Dumay (2009), Dumay and Garanina (2013) and Cuozzo, et al. (2017) show that many of the
IC studies are aimed at identifying and measuring its components, while the current interest
lies in understanding how IC interacts with organizational practices and how IC is mobilized

for various projects. This study thus extends previous research by investigating the extent to
which organizations utilize their IC abilities and blend its various components to develop
bioeconomic projects.
1.3. Theoretical framework
Following a literature review of 453 papers on bioeconomy published between 2005 and
2014, Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou (2016) identify three ideal visions of bioeconomy, namely
the bio-technology vision, the bio-resource vision and the bio-ecology vision. The key
characteristics of the three bioeconomy visions are presented bellow (table no. 1).

Table no. 1. Key characteristics of the bioeconomy visions
Aims &
objectives
Value
creation

Drivers &
mediators of
innovation

Spatial
focus

The BioTechnology Vision
Economic growth &
job creation
Application of
biotechnology,
commercialization
of research &
technology
R&D, patents,
Technology
Transfer Offices,
Research councils
and funders
(Science push,
linear model)

Global clusters/
Central regions

The Bio-Resource Vision
Economic growth &
sustainability
Conversion and upgrading
of bio-resources (process
oriented)

Interdisciplinary,
optimization of land use,
include degraded land in
the production of biofuels,
use and availability of
bio-resources, waste
management, engineering,
science & market
(Interactive & networked
production mode)
Rural/Peripheral regions

The Bio-Ecology Vision
Sustainability, biodiversity,
conservation of ecosystems,
avoiding soil degradation
Development of integrated
production systems and highquality products with
territorial identity
Identification of favorable
organic agro-ecological
practices, ethics, risk,
transdisciplinary
sustainability, ecological
interactions, re-use &
recycling of waste, land use,
(Circular and self-sustained
production mode)
Rural/Peripheral regions

Source: Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou, 2016, p. 10
As explained in Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou (2016), the bio-technology vision clearly
privileges economic growth and job creation, assuming positive effects on climate change
and environmental aspects. Investments in research and innovation are fundamental in this
vision, resulting in the production of scientific knowledge from a linear model of innovation,
concentrated in a limited number of regions globally. More sustainability concerns are
addressed in the bio-resource vision of bioeconomy, as capitalizing on bio-resources would
drive economic growth. This vision highlights the processing and conversion of bioresources into new products. Research and innovation are also important to this vision, but
result from collaboration of partners with dissimilar competences and across sectors. Finally,
the bio-ecology vision is primarily directed to achieving sustainability, promotes
biodiversity, conservation of ecosystems and prevention of soil degradation. These visions
are not mutually exclusive and can overlap (Devaney and Henchion, 2018).

2. Research methodology
An important number of international, regional and national governmental and policy
organizations have developed bioeconomy strategies in the past decade. For example, OECD
and the European Commission have both produced key strategy documents (OECD, 2009;
European Commission, 2012), and several European countries (including Austria, Denmark,
France and the Netherlands) have developed national policy strategies for the bioeconomy.
We thus investigate the application of those policies in the case of OMV, a listed Austrian
group acting in the oil and gas industry. We select OMV first because it is based in a European
country equipped with a national strategy for the bioeconomy (i.e. Austria). Second, the oil
and gas industry where our case organization acts, is one of the appropriate fields for having
projects and initiatives pertaining to bioeconomy. Third, given the nature of its activity, the
Group’s activities have an environmental impact, and is therefore expected to be committed
to sustainability policies.
Therefore, the general approach of our research is to construct a case study, since we have
proposed a “comprehensive description of an event or social unit” (Şandor, 2013, p. 22).
Cassell and Symon (1994) show that the dynamic analysis of organizational phenomena is
an important area of research and that case studies allow for a detailed analysis of the change.
The case study as a research strategy is specific to qualitative research, which in turn involves
inductive analysis, the use of some theories to understand the phenomenon and the factors
that influence each other, as well as a design of context-dependent research continuously
adapted along the way (Şandor, 2013, p. 22).
Case studies can be based on different types of data, depending on the researcher's access to
data (Şandor, 2013). Given the limited access to the Group’s activities, as well as previous
research in the IC field (Guthrie, Petty and Yongvanich, 2004), we utilize the corporate
reports issued by OMV. Previous studies in the IC area show that the analysis of corporate
disclosures is a common method of research (Guthrie, Petty and Yongvanich, 2004; Dumay
and Cai, 2015). “Annual reports are highly useful sources of information, because managers
of companies commonly signal what is important through the reporting mechanism”
(Guthrie, Petty and Yongvanich, 2004, p. 287). They are therefore an important means of
communicating with the stakeholders the main achievements and strategic projects of the
companies.
We thus select for our study the seven most recent SR that address the OMV’s bioeconomic
actions and policies, starting with the year 2010. We excluded prior reports from the analysis
because it was after 2010 that most such initiatives in the area of bioeconomy have emerged
and developed in OMV. We performed a manual content analysis of the corporate reports,
following prior literature (Guthrie, Petty and Yongvanich, 2004; Melloni, 2015). This
research method is predominant in IC studies (Dumay and Cai, 2015), and its limits are
primarily related to the quantitative analysis employed sometimes. We have not, however,
attempted to measure IC but to investigate its effects, and thus circumvent such criticism.
This approach facilitated the in-depth analysis of corporate narratives. The content analysis
was carried out in a qualitative manner (Şandor, 2013, pp. 172-178), where the coding is not
aimed at the statistical analysis of trends and causality, but it is a theoretical one
(Krippendorff, 2013). Particularly, the analysis was performed through a process of close
reading of the documents, while also comparing their content in order to assess the evolution
of the messages. The first procedure entailed the identification of statements devoted to IC
disclosures with a focus on (but not limited to) a specific section of the SR (i.e. the section
in which the company discloses information about innovation). We also considered other
statements in the reports that highlighted the company’s perspective on innovation. The
second procedure concerned the classification of statements into one of the three IC
categories, namely human, organizational and social capital. Thus, from a methodological
point of view, coding was both open (text analysis and code attachment) and selective (the
identification of the phenomena and aspects related to the subject investigated) (Strauss and
Corbin, 1998). Finally, we have analyzed nine bioeconomy projects launched by OMV post2010 and considered their characteristics. Coding of these characteristics was made
independently by two team members, thus ensuring the validity of the approach. Based on
this analysis, we employed the theoretical framework and its three visions to organize the
codified material. We presented our results in accordance with the methodological
recommendations for qualitative content analysis (Şandor, 2013, pp. 177-178), in a narrative
style (with quotes from the reports), in a quantitative style (highlighting the trends – for
example, the evolution of expenses), and in a tabular and graphical style.
2.1. The OMV Group as case organization
OMV is one of the most important listed entities in Austria, with a workforce of 20,700
employees and an important international representation. The Group is active in Refining and
Marketing in 13 countries and in Exploration and Production in 17, on four continents. The
Austrian government holds a significant participation in the Group (31.5%) and IPIC Abu
Dhabi holds 24.9% of the shares; the rest (43.3%) represents free float, shares being mainly
held by investors from Austria, UK and USA, and own shares (0.3%).
OMV has taken a stance towards a more sustainable environment by signing the United
Nations Global Compact, the world’s largest initiative to encourage companies to adopt
sustainable practices and report on their implementation. This position is further illustrated
in the Group’s strategy: “We aim to provide energy for a better life. We are producing and
marketing oil & gas, innovative energy and high-end petrochemical solutions – in a
responsible way” (www.omv.com). In its SR OMV recognizes the dangers of climate change
and has committed to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Group has also
adopted a comprehensive code of conduct and a business ethics directive.
OMV publishes a SR simultaneously with its annual report. The SR focuses on managing
sustainability along the entire value chain. SRs also provide detailed information on
stakeholder relationships, human resources, health and safety, human rights, security,
environmental management, climate change, renewable and future energies and R&D. The
focus of the Group is on combining economic prosperity, social cohesion and environmental
protection. Consequently, these actions are oriented towards creating long-term
sustainability. Moreover, OMV has initiatives and projects in the area of bioeconomy, which
we further analyze in terms of innovative effort and the bioeconomy vision.

3. Results and discussion
OMV’s commitment to sustainability is visible through its reporting. As a first step, the
results of the qualitative analysis of open and selective coding data (Strauss and Corbin, 1998;
Şandor, 2013) are narratively presented (Şandor, 2013).

The company’s reports show how OMV integrates social, environmental and economic
considerations into its business, by developing strategies in the areas of health, safety,
security and environmental management as well as human resources support to sustainability
management. Moreover, the evolution reported over time is a first indication of the
innovation efforts that OMV is pursuing in the area of sustainability. This evolution is
sizeable in two directions: the form of the disclosure and the initiatives disclosed. The form
of disclosure and assurance indicates, first, the plurality of disclosure standards (Albu, et al.,
2013). OMV SRs for the period 2010-2013 meet the requirements of the A+ application level
of the GRI G3 framework, with assurance provided by Deloitte. Since 2014, the company
follows the G4 Guidelines which will be superseded with the GRI Sustainability Reporting
Standards starting with the 1st of January 2018.
Second, the sustainability efforts intensify during the period investigated. As such, the reports
indicate that OMV engaged in consultations with the external stakeholders of the company.
The Group identified 18 distinctive areas of interest and classified them on three levels of
importance:
 High importance: health and safety; oil spills; security; business ethics and corruption;
energy efficiency; regulatory environment; employee attraction, retention and training;
impacts of climate change; governance; community engagement; diversity; human rights;
 Moderate importance: water management; renewable energy; supply chain
management; R&D;
 Low importance: unconventional energy sources; biodiversity.
Safety, security, environment, health, community and stakeholder relationships and socioeconomic affairs are reported to be at the core of OMVs vision for attaining long term
sustainability. The Group reports to be involved in developing new technologies and by
applying the best practices OMV strives to act in a responsible manner and promote
sustainable growth for all its stakeholders and interested parties.
Starting with 2010, two areas of interest – People and Planet – have been highlighted at the
management level. In the first year, over 3,600 sustainability goals were defined by
managers, with 53% related to health and safety, 30% in the area of CO2 emissions reduction,
and 17% targeting diversity issues (OMV SR, 2010, p. 8). The Group set the goal of reducing
the CO2 emissions generated from its activities by 80% by 2050, a target agreed by European
Union and G8 leaders in 2009. This goal may require 95% decarbonization of the road
transportation sector.
In this respect, we have noted slight improvement over the time period we investigated, from
12.2 million tones CO2 equivalent in 2010 to 11 million tones CO2 equivalent in 2016 (which
is a decrease by almost 10% of these emissions). Such improvements are achievable mainly
as a result of sustainability projects focused on more ecological activities and biofuels,
projects sustained by innovation.
A significant part of the innovation in the area of sustainability pertains to bioeconomy
projects. OMV’s engagement in bioeconomy projects has emerged starting in 2010. The
content analysis of about 500 pages of OMV’s reports and the open and selective coding
(Strauss and Corbin, 1998; Şandor, 2013) have led us to the identification of bioeconomic

projects. Next we present an overview of the projects in which the company is currently being
involved (table no. 2).
Table no. 2. Bioeconomy projects initiated by OMV since 2010
No.

Inception
year

Project title

Brief description

4
5

Wind2hydrogen
Synthesis Gas

6

Feedstock recovery

7

Electro-mobility

8

Co-Processing of
renewable
feedstocks
Direct conversion of
CO2 to
hydrocarbons

Building a hydrogen fueling
infrastructure in Germany
Building a hydrogen fueling
infrastructure in Austria
Production of alternative aviation
fuel
Production of renewable hydrogen.
Production of a renewable and CO2
neutral fuel
The use of plastic waste to produce
synthetic crude
Develop the charging network for
battery powered electrical vehicles
Increase the quality and stability of
fuels with biogenic components

Prior to
2010
2012

3

Hydrogen mobilityGermany
Hydrogen mobilityAustria
AUFWIND

Conversion of CO2 and biomass to
alcohols, which can be added to
gasoline.

1
2

9

Individual
or
partnered
Partnership
Individual

2013

Partnership

2014
2014

Partnership
Partnership

2016

Individual

2016

Partnership

2016

Individual

2016

Partnership

All the projects described above have produced positive outcomes, thus none of the projects
has been discontinued by the Group and their respective partners. In addition, figure no. 1
highlights the increasing importance ascribed by the company to such activities over time, as
the number of projects increased year to year (from one project in 2010 to nine projects in
2016). The innovation effort reflected by the R&D expenditure followed a similar pattern. In
particular, the 2010 R&D expense amounted to EUR 15.8 million, while in 2016 the amount
amounted to EUR 28.4 million, which represents an 80% increase.

10
8
6
4
2
0
2010

2011

2012

2013

Partnership

2014

2015

2016

Individual

Figure no. 1. Time-evolution of the bioeconomy projects initiated by OMV

We first analyze in more depth the innovation efforts of the Group and the components of
the IC mobilized. The most visible component of the IC is the social capital, as also indicated
in figure no. 1. The vast majority of the Group’s projects are developed in partnerships. The
following quotes are used to further illustrate the abovementioned tendency and to underline
the role of the social capital in OMV’s innovation process. More precisely, the company
highlights in its SRs the close cooperation with other organizations from within the industry,
but also with universities and research institutes, with a view of creating new energy sources
and technologies.
 “Together with our five partners in the H2 Mobility initiative, we have agreed on a
specific action plan for the construction of a nationwide hydrogen-refueling network for fuel
cell powered electric vehicles.” (OMV, 2013, p. 16)
 “In Germany, we are part of a consortium, under the leadership of the research center
Jülich, which aims to demonstrate that microalgae for the economically viable production of
alternative aviation fuel can be cultivated in Germany.” (OMV, 2014, p. 10)
 “Another innovation area is the direct conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons like alcohols.
Together with the Technical University of Vienna, Austria, OMV started the investigation
under laboratory conditions to convert CO2 and biomass enzymatically to alcohols, which
can be added to gasoline.” (OMV, 2016, p. 47)
We noted in OMV’s discourse the words utilized to reflect the partnerships and hence the
importance of the social capital for the company. These statements indicate the company’s
“ability to share information to enhance individual and collective well-being” (IIRC, 2013,
p. 15). Our analysis supports previous research finding that IC disclosures are generally
focused on social capital (Guthrie and Petty, 2000; Bozzolan, Favotto and Ricceri, 2003;
Davey, Schneider and Davey, 2009; Melloni, 2015).
We also identify in the Group’s reports several disclosures which made reference to the
organizational capital. As the company also develops individual projects, the role of this IC
component in the process of innovation was emphasized:
 “OMV leverages synergies of exploration, production and power plant know-how and
will analyze the potential in this area with the aim of investing in a geothermal power plant.”
(OMV, 2011, p. 74)
 “This research project is using biogenic material unfit for human consumption – such
as woodchips and straw – to produce energy and draws on our refining know-how and the
existing facilities at Schwechat.” (OMV, 2012, p. 16)
Statements associated with the role of the human capital were also identified. Moreover, the
corporate narratives included quantitative disclosures in order to underline employees’
contribution to knowledge creation:
 “Innovative ideas from our employees saved us EUR 8,774,380 in 2012.” (OMV, 2012,
p. 60)
 “We have the skills, the international presence and the commitment to make a real
difference to how the world consumes energy.” (OMV, 2013, p. 17)
In summary, the analysis suggests that OMV’s innovation efforts in the area of bioeconomy
rely on all the components of IC. The employees’ skills and motivations to innovate (i.e.
human capital), together with the elements that entail the organizational capital, represent
essential components for the company’s innovation strategies. In addition, the social capital
builds on these elements by complementing and enhancing their importance. These findings
are consistent with previous literature on IC (Ahuja, 2000; Subramaniam and Venkatraman,
2001; Subramaniam and Youndt, 2005). Given the prevalence of the corporate disclosures
associated with the social capital component of the IC, our analysis suggests that in the
context of bioeconomy, social capital is the most important facilitator of the OMV’s ability
to innovate. As such, partnerships seem to represent the most important way in which the
company intends to deliver sustainable benefits to its stakeholders, while at the same time
pursuing its future growth and revenue generation. In turn, a sustainable behavior also
provides the corporate license to operate in the society, which represents the necessary
condition to maintain “the social acceptance of our operations” (OMV, 2016, p. 3).
Next, we turn to the type of vision encapsulated by the projects pertaining to bioeconomy.
We carefully analyze their description in the corporate reports in order to identify the types
of vision associated. The coding and classification was independently performed by two
researchers, to limit the subjectivity of the analysis (Krippendorff, 2013) and it entailed the
identification of the relationship between the text of the reports and the theoretical framework
proposed by Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou (2016) by means of keywords (open, axial, and
selective coding according to Şandor, 2013, p. 175).
Table no. 3: Bioeconomy vision of OMV’s projects
No.

Project title

Details

1

Hydrogen
mobility-Germany

2

Hydrogen
mobility-Austria

3
4

AUFWIND
Wind2hydrogen

5

Synthesis Gas

6

Feedstock
recovery

7

Electro-mobility

The consortium (17 companies – car
manufacturers, oil and gas companies and utilities
companies) developed a joint entity business model
to develop an infrastructure for hydrogen in
Germany
Focus on hydrogen fuel cells as an alternative to
traditional means of transport, while simultaneously
reducing CO2
Production of alternative aviation fuel
Establish the conditions needed to produce
renewable hydrogen
SynGas can be transformed into liquid fuel such as
petrol or diesel and is widely used as a chemical
feedstock
The project uses plastic waste to produce synthetic
crude in a pyrolysis process. This recycled crude
can be processed into any desired refinery product,
while reducing the dependence on fossil resources
and improving carbon intensity
The innovative partnership supports the
transformation process on the energy market. OMV
will take a 40% stake in SMATRICS (a provider
for all services related to electro-mobility and the
first to offer a complete, high-performance
charging network throughout Austria)

Vol. 20 • No. 49. • August 2018

Bioeconomy
vision
Technology

Technology

Resource
Resource
Resource

Ecology


Project title

8

Co-Processing
of renewable
feedstocks

9

Direct conversion
of CO2 to
hydrocarbons

Details
Co-Processing introduces the biogenic additive
already in the production process. Innovative
refinery integrated biomass-to-liquid concepts to
produce gasoline and diesel from biogenic
feedstock are the basis on which OMV develops
next generation fuels
Conversion of CO2 and biomass to alcohols, which
can be added to gasoline

Bioeconomy
vision
Ecology

Resource

With regard to our theoretical lenses, we note that most early projects tend to result in the
creation of bio-technologies through innovation and research activities. For example,
regarding Project no. 1, the Group states that:
“The H2 Mobility initiative was founded in September 2009 as a public-private partnership
between Germany’s National Organisation for Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology (NOW)
and eight industry stakeholders, including OMV. Its aim is to build a hydrogen fueling
infrastructure by 2015 and successfully introduce fuel cell vehicles into the German market.”
(OMV, 2010, p. 19)
The project thus assumes that developing this infrastructure will benefit the host country of
Germany by finally introducing cell vehicles on the respective market. It also obviously
creates jobs for builders of this infrastructure, and mobilizes important research and
innovation resources resulting in new technology. It thus exemplifies the bio-technology
vision of bioeconomy.
Project no. 3 has a however rather different scope. Initiated in 2013 and coordinated by the
Jülich research canter, one of the largest interdisciplinary research centers in Europe, the
project aims at producing alternative aviation fuels:
“The AUFWIND project involves twelve partners from research and industry, with Jülich
researchers investigating the suitability of biomass made from microalgae as a basis for the
production of kerosene. This innovative undertaking will optimize the production of algae
oil by assessing different photo bioreactor technologies and adapting them to Central
European conditions. The project is evaluating whether the process is economically and
ecologically feasible.” (OMV, 2014, p. 10)
As a result, bio-resources are processed and converted into new products through research
and innovation activities, thus being characteristic of a bio-resource vision on bioeconomy
(Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou, 2016).
In addition, starting with 2016, OMV initiated Project no. 6, which uses plastic waste to
produce a synthetic crude that reduces the amount of fossil resources needed in plastics
production. The following excerpt further denotes the manner in which the bio-ecology
vision was adopted:
“Circular economy and urban mining are two important topics at OMV. Recycling used
plastics instead of burning it as waste is one important way to make better use of a valuable
resource. However, the quality of recycled plastics is often not very high. Feedstock recovery
is an innovative OMV research project which uses old plastics to produce synthetic refinery
feedstock.” (OMV, 2016, p. 45)
Thus, as exemplified in our analyses, OMV’s bioeconomy activities fall in all three visions
of bioeconomy identified in Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou (2016). However, these activities
seem to gradually shift their focus over time from creating bio-technologies to that of bioresources, and finally by being focused on bio-ecology. As indicated by Bugge, Hansen and
Klitkou (2016), these visions thus coexist in practice and may be used at different phases of
bioeconomy projects. The more complex nature of ecology-related project seems to defer
their beginning after the commencement of projects in the other two visions. Additionally,
our analyses also portray the joint existence of projects classified in all three visions at the
same time, depending on their focus. 2016 thus corresponds to launching four new projects,
one creating technology, one focused on bio-resources and two bio-ecological ones. This also
testifies for the increasing scope of OMV’s bioeconomy projects, as successful projects have
caught on. As two out of the four new projects are developed in close collaboration with
universities and other industry partners, we also observe the increased role played by the
social capital in this process. Furthermore, the relevance of the other two IC components is
also emphasized, as both bio-ecological projects are individual one, reflecting the inherent
contribution of both human and organizational capital.

Conclusions
In this paper we have investigated the existence and evolution of organizational bioeconomic
practices of OMV, a major international player in the oil and gas industry, and explored how
IC is employed to support these actions. To respond to the proposed research objective, we
have used a qualitative approach consisting of a case study and a qualitative content analysis.
To develop our analyses, we have employed the strategies outlined by Miles and Huberman
(1995, pp. 245-246): identifying themes, grouping, using comparison and identifying
relationships between items through theory. Additionally, we have used the theoretical lens
proposed by Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou (2016) to uncover how the focus of bioeconomic
projects may have evolved over time.
First, we find that the number of bioeconomic projects in which OMV engaged increases
over time, along with the innovation efforts in this area. Second, we illustrate how OMV
blends all components of IC in its bioeconomic efforts, with a stronger emphasis on the social
capital component, pertaining to partnerships and collaborative learning. Third, we find that
OMV’s bioeconomic projects pertain to all three types of visions identified by Bugge,
Hansen and Klitkou (2016), thus confirming their prediction that these ideal visions do not
manifest exclusive of one another. In addition, we also note an evolution of these projects’
focus over time, starting from bio-technological ones, through bio-resources ones, and ending
with bio-ecological ones. This suggests that, as individual entities embark on the way to
bioeconomy practices, these tend to be first oriented toward economic growth and job
creation, and then to sustainability and biodiversity concerns. We finally show how OMV
mobilizes all components of IC to achieve successful both individual and partnered
bioeconomic projects.
We thus contribute to the literature on bioeconomy first by the in-depth investigation of the
bioeconomic projects of a major international organization, and by showing how various
components of IC contribute to the bioeconomy. Second, we are among the first to apply the
theoretical framework proposed by Bugge, Hansen and Klitkou (2016) to investigate
organizational practices and to explore how an organization expands its bioeconomic actions
over time.
Future literature may expand our analyses of bioeconomic projects to larger time horizons,
similar organizations acting in the same industry, or to organizations acting in other
industries. Thus, cross-sectional comparisons could be envisaged to figure out patterns in the
way organizations are able to engage in bioeconomic projects. Similarly, the bioeconomic
practices of organizations situated in other geographic areas might be investigated. For
example, companies in countries that do not have a national policy for bioeconomy might
engage in different bioeconomic projects, and some light may be shed on the effectiveness
of such policies.


