Introduction
For the European context the progress in the field of bioeconomy has become a priority
objective of the European Union's Policy for research, development and innovation being
coordinated by the principles of sustainability. Achieving this goal is implicitly aimed at
developing biotechnologies that can be used at macroeconomic and global levels so that
classical (high-cost) resources are replaced by renewable resources of biological nature
(Aguilar et al., 2009; Meyer, 2017; von Braun, 2014). Bioeconomy, as a field of smart
specialization, is considered as a viable source of competitive advantage for the European
Economic Area, mainly by directing the transfer of scientific knowledge generated inside
research centers towards innovative industries for the purpose of manufacturing raw materials
and reliable materials, ecologic food, assertive and somatic medical devices, new chemicals,
and renewable energy resources (European Commission, 2013; Steffen, et al. 2015;
Mustalahti, 2017). Ensuring the transfer of knowledge at an advanced and thorough level will
contribute to the exponential growth of the quality of the human resource (Staffas, et al.,
2013). The more knowledge-sharing of production and business knowledge management will
be more intense, broader and more transparent then the chances for employees to find the best
solutions in their work will be greater. Moreover, the undifferentiated and non-discriminatory
transfer of knowledge leads to the enhancement of the creativity and innovation potential of
each employee and ultimately creates a real added value which is difficult for the organization
to measure. From this point of view, the awareness of the importance of the infusion of
knowledge and the speed with which the transfer of information is made become
indispensable. Consequently, bioeconomy discoveries are launching extensive evolutionary
processes that call for a global approach where the knowledge-based economy plays a
defining role (Birner, 2018; Lainez et al., 2018).
The intellectual capital of an organization can be successfully operated through appropriate
management strategies, these influencing the transformation of the potential intellectual
capital (i.e. the available resources) into operational intellectual capital (i.e. results that
increase the value of the organization). The benefits of an optimal management of the
intellectual capital of an organization are numerous and generate an irreversible evolution
on the scale of knowledge towards superior levels (Bejinaru & Iordache, 2011; Bratianu &
Bejinaru, 2017).
As the field of bioeconomy is a new and extremely complex one it requires a capital of
advanced knowledge on different specialized niches. Connected to this approach we focus
to bring forward research figures and solutions mainly related to the area of education and
training. We emphasize the overall purpose that we will contribute to building solutions for
the improvement of education and training basing on results from our survey.
The reference concept that confers the originality of this research is the entropic model of
intellectual capital (Bratianu, 2009) which is based on the theory of organizational
knowledge and is developed on the basis of metaphorical thinking. The model functions
according to the principle of entropy in a dynamic and nonlinear reference system and
consists of independent components that we present as: rational knowledge, emotional
knowledge and spiritual knowledge of the employees of an organization.
The originality perspective of the paper is found in the application of a questionnaire
developed on the basis of the entropic model of intellectual capital which components we
consider to be basic and independent, preserving its intellectual dimension. In this context,
we argue that the canonical model of intellectual capital (Stewart, 1997) is outdated in both
the scientific and business spheres and no longer corresponds to the reality faced by
business organizations in managing their resources (Bratianu, 2009).
1. Literature review
1.1. Perspectives on bioeconomy
In 2012, the European Union was stating a working definition for the bioeconomy by which
the “bioeconomy encompasses the production of renewable biological resources and their
conversion into food, bio-based products and bioenergy”. Essentially bioeconomy is
interconnected with large fields as: agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food, pulp and paper
industries, parts of chemical, biotechnological and energy industries (Dieckhoff et al., 2015,
p. 11). In the new vision of the G7 Policy, bioeconomy is embraces both innovation and
sustainability in order to support economic growth and employment. The G7 Policy states
that bioeconomy must be understood as the knowledge-based production and utilization of
biological resources necessary to provide products, processes and services in all sectors of
trade and industry within the framework of a sustainable economic system (Dieckhoff et
al., 2015). According to the previous perspectives we consider to having presented strong
arguments which frame the bioeconomy paradigm in the interdisciplinary area of research,
education, training and technology transfer within the academic context of which they
belong to (Bratianu, 2007; Hansen and Bjørkhaug, 2017).
Technology transfer and commercialization is another important component which can be
greatly intensified by universities and research centers. Innovations such as new patents for
products or processes are easier to be transferred to the business sector throughout direct
commercialization between the two parties: the universities and the companies (Dabija,
Postelnicu & Pop, 2014). ”The greater the stock of patents of a university then there are
bigger chances of leveraging them through contracts with businesses and thus to be more
effective at seizing their innovations’ potential” (Bejinaru, 2017, p. 591). We mention that
"Ştefan cel Mare" University is in the position of national leader in the field of inventions
according to the Romanian universities ranking both for the number of patents awarded and
the number of patent applications registered by the higher education institutions at the State
Office for Inventions and Trademarks – OSIM for the period 2007-2013. These data are
recorded by the Official Intellectual Property Bulletins published by OSIM (2017). "Ştefan
cel Mare" University takes important steps to support entrepreneurship and innovation
through projects won in national and international competitions (an exhaustive list of
national and international projects run by “Ştefan cel Mare” University in Suceava can be
consulted at http://www.usv.ro/index.php/ro/17/Proiecte/20/4).
Besides European Union’s 2030 Strategy on Bioeconomy, there are emerging a series of
official documents as real evidence “that regions worldwide are indicating bioeconomy a
top priority. It is also largely accepted that bioeconomy is related to smart specialization
processes” (Lianu, 2017, p. 23). Debates on this issue call for an understanding of the
necessary progress in bioeconomy that may be realized by individuals throughout
entrepreneurial innovation. Initiatives of specialization for the field of bioeconomy may be
developed by clusters which due to their cross-sectoral configuration facilitate the
collaboration between related industries and institutions. According to this view, “clusters
have resulted to be real platforms for innovation and industrial change” (Izsak, 2014, p. 12)
representing “springboards” which strongly increase the networking and cooperation

between businesses, research organizations and universities within various geographical
areas like regions or countries (Lämmer-Gamp, et al., 2014; Prelipcean & Bejinaru, 2016).
Researchers and policy makers speak about various types of approaches which could
enhance the transition towards the core of the bioeconomy but the developed research was
focused to identify those actions which involve the domain of education in general and the
participation of the university in particular. Specialists of the domain (Felt, 2007; Ribeiro
and Millar, 2015) argue about a series of participatory approaches which in theory are
idealistic but in practice might at times become limited:
 public education, whereby ‘experts’ in the public or private sectors provide other
individuals and organizations with information on the bioeconomy;
 public dialogue, whereby ‘experts’ in the public or private sectors consult and set up
forums for debate with other individuals and organizations;
 public co-production of knowledge, based on cooperation between a range of experts,
citizens and interest groups.
Certainly that the examples are many and may be discussed various activities that aim to
raise awareness of the bioeconomy among individual citizens and consumers (Pallett, 2012;
Ribeiro and Millar, 2015).
1.2. The roles of universities in developing the human capital
The universities must take seriously their role in facilitating the access of small and
medium enterprises to innovations and technology transfer by disseminating the results of
its research and providing the know-how for its implementation. Another mission of the
universities is of social leaders. This means that academia can and must offer models for
society in terms of education, morality, behavior generating strategic thinking patterns
(Bratianu & Bolisani, 2015; Hapenciuc et al., 2016; Bejinaru & Prelipcean, 2017).
Trends in the field of frontier sciences lead to the defining role of universities in the
development of human capital engaged in a dynamic equation of bioeconomy at regional
and multi-sectoral level. From our perspective, students must be viewed as future leaders
shaped by the universities and launched into the market to engage all their knowledge and
skills in the direction of achieving the progress for the companies in the branch and
implicitly for obtaining an entrepreneurial competitive advantage (Hapenciuc et al., 2015).
Briefly we mention that universities should focus on increasing the impact of education and
research; transferring knowledge and training the skills required for graduates to
successfully practice their profession; “strengthening the knowledge triangle – education,
research, business; increasing the capacity to meet the needs of the economy, creating selffinancing mechanisms” (Lassnigg et al., 2017, p. 8).
The literature analysis clearly and unequivocally highlights the fact that macroeconomic
strategies focus on key areas, which are priorities for the development of the bioeconomy,
such as: fostering research and innovation, primarily in the field of biotechnology;
promoting collaboration between industry, enterprises and research institutions; prioritizing
the optimized use of biomass by implementation of the cascade principle and by utilizing
waste residue streams; and providing funding support for the development of bio-based
activities (de Besi & McCormick, 2015, p. 10473).

This research aims at reflecting the contribution of the "Stefan cel Mare" University on the
development of intellectual capital (of students – as future leaders and employees), with
impact on bioeconomy. The usefulness of the research approach is the overall picture that
reflects the role of universities in preparing human capital and generating new knowledge
for achieving a sustainable bioeconomy. As future active professionals on the labor market,
the students of the "Stefan cel Mare" University will become components of the intellectual
capital within the bioeconomy organizations and will make their contribution according to
their preparation. Formation of a student in a higher education institution takes place
through the transfer and acquiring of knowledge on several levels, namely: rational,
emotional and spiritual (Lefter et al., 2011).
1.3. Knowledge as components of the entropic model of intellectual capital
The entropic model of the intellectual capital for the development of a sustainable
bioeconomy is build on the following principles: intellectual capital is formed as the effect
of the dynamic process of rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge; the potential
represented by intellectual capital can be capitalized through the action of organizational
integrators; the revitalization of intellectual capital occurs through the creation of
knowledge and through continuous learning; the key aspect that determines strategy
development and implementation is the vision of leaders considered an entropic driving
force within the organization (Bratianu and Orzea, 2013).
Research in the field of intellectual capital has excelled over the last 50 years mainly thanks
to contributions by Edvinsson & Malone (1997), Roos (et. al. 2005), Stewart (1997) and
Sveiby (1997). A series of innovations in the field of intellectual capital were introduced by
Andriessen (2004) and Nissen (2006) who attribute the concept the character of flows and
stocks. Further, the conceptual framework was extended by Bratianu (2009) by overcoming
the linear mathematical space (used by previous theories) and the association of intellectual
capital and knowledge concepts with a strongly nonlinear, dynamic and asymptotic domain.
We propose the conversion of the basic composition of intellectual capital into a new
structure of entropic intellectual capital, based on the following innovative arguments:
 the dynamic interactions of rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge are the real
generators of organizational intellectual capital;
 organizational intellectual capital is viewed in the two hypostases, both as potential
and operational. The transformation of the potential intellectual capital (based on existing
internal resources) into the operational intellectual capital (results as products and
processes) is achieved with better efficiency through the influence of ”organizational
integrators: leadership, management and organizational culture” (Bejinaru, 2017, p. 511).
Integrators, were introduce as a distinct concept by Bratianu (2009, p. 99) according to
whom they represent ”a powerful field of forces capable to combine two or more elements
into a new entity, based on interdependence and synergy”;
 the enrichment of intellectual capital in an organization is achieved through its
dynamic capabilities, such as innovation and learning processes;
 this theory of intellectual entropic capital is conditioned by the existence of a strong
vision capable of impelling the organization in order to gain competitive advantage and
thus reinvent the long-term success of the organization;

The rational knowledge is the result of a reflective mental process. Rational knowledge is
obtained throughout the processing of data and information using our rationality and for a
long period has been the only knowledge accepted by philosophers and scientists due to its
objectivity (Polanyi, 1983; Nonaka și Takeuchi, 1995). In this view, rational knowledge can
be measured due to its extensive dimension, can be accumulated, stored and disseminated,
providing a quantitative description.
Emotional knowledge is generated by interaction of the individual with the environment
and operates feelings and emotions. These proved to be a critical factor for granting the
success of the motivation and innovation systems in organizations (Goleman, 1995; Hill,
2008; Kahneman, 2011). Emotional knowledge can be measured due to its intensive
dimension and generate different intensities of feelings and emotions, providing a
qualitative description.
Within the spectrum of spiritual knowledge are included the core values, goals, the deepest
meanings and highest motivations at individual and organizational levels (Zohar &
Marshall, 2000). Considering that rational knowledge is the equal of what we think and that
emotional knowledge is the equivalent of what we feel than, we may assume that, the
spiritual knowledge represents what we are. The power of spiritual knowledge may be used
to generate the necessary determination of individuals to reach their goals.
From the perspective of the presented theory of the entropic intellectual capital, we may
consider that in any organization there are three fields of knowledge – cognitive, emotional and
spiritual – that are in a continuous dynamic. That means that one form of knowledge can be
transformed into another form of knowledge, as happens in physics where one form of energy
can be transferred into another form of energy under the action of a field of forces.

2. Research methodology
The research aims to reflect the contribution of "Ştefan cel Mare" University in Suceava on
the development of intellectual capital (students – as future leaders and employees) with
impact on the bioeconomy. The usefulness of the research approach stems from the global
image that reflects the role of universities in preparing human capital and generating new
knowledge for the realization of a sustainable bioeconomy.
The collectivity investigated within this research is represented by the students of “Ştefan
cel Mare” University in Suceava, the final years of the bachelor, master and doctoral
cycles. We chose to do this research at the level of students in the final years, because the
subject is generally not accessible to all students, and we thought that by choosing students
who are about to complete a university education cycle, we maximize the chances of
getting informed.
The exploratory research has essentially sought to provide a basis for analysis that allows to
draw out guidelines on how rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge influences and
potentiates, the knowledge in the field of bioeconomy at the level of students in at the
"Ştefan cel Mare" University in Suceava.
The selection of students from the "Ştefan cel Mare" University in Suceava is motivated by
the fact that starting October 20, 2016, this university, along with economic agents from
Suceava and Botoşani counties, the Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Suceava and
Botoşani, the Suceava City Hall, the Botoşani City Hall and the Suceava County Council
form the Innovative Regional Cluster of Bioeconomy Suceava-Botoşani. The Association
aims to provide an efficient framework for cooperation among its members in order to
increase the Research & Development capacity and innovation in the North-East region of
Romania, to represent their interests towards third parties, to increase the regional
competitiveness in the field of bioeconomy and to increase the capacity to implement
European agricultural and industrial policies, including the efficient use of nonreimbursable funds as well as other sources of funding.
The study was based on a sample of 386 students from several faculties (Faculty of
Forestry, Faculty of Food Engineering, Faculty of Economic Sciences and Public
Administration, Faculty of Physical Education and Sports – Department of Health and
Human Development, Faculty of History and Geography, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Mechatronics and
Management) of the considered university. The selection of faculties was based on the
connections found between the curricula of these faculties and the priority themes of
research in the field of bioeconomy: raw materials, food and chemicals, energy resources,
economic and industrial exploitation of advanced biotechnologies.

2.1. Research purpose and hypotheses
The socio-statistical study aimed at identifying the most influential factors in the students'
knowledge spectrum, regarding the evolution of human capital in the field of bioeconomy.
In order to achieve the previously mentioned goal we have formulated the following
research associated hypotheses:
H1: The formation of human capital in the bioeconomy field is influenced by the transfer of
rational knowledge to students.
H2: The formation of human capital in the bioeconomy field is influenced by the transfer of
emotional and spiritual knowledge to students.
H3: It is possible to identify a major interest of the students of “Ştefan cel Mare” University
of Suceava regarding the thematic of the research in the field of bioeconomy.
H4: There are no significant differences between the two gender students in assessing
transfer of rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge or in the field of bioeconomy at the
investigated university.
H5: There are significant differences between the students from the social-humane sciences
faculties and those from the technical faculties regarding the evaluation of the transfer of
rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge in the field of bioeconomy at the level of
“Ştefan cel Mare” University of Suceava.
H6: There are significant differences between the students from the three education cycles
in the evaluation of the transfer of knowledge of rational, emotional and spiritual
knowledge and in the field of bioeconomy at “Ştefan cel Mare” University of Suceava.

2.2. Design of research
The research questionnaire was developed on the basis of consultation of the specialized
literature and in consensus with the purpose and hypotheses of the research (Hapenciuc et
al., 2008). In view of the hypothesis proposed in this study, we chose to develop an
exploratory research based on direct survey (questionnaires were applied by the
interviewers to students) combined with the indirect survey through the online
questionnaire (the researcher and the investigated persons do not come at all in direct
contact) (Hapenciuc et al., 2015) available between January and February 2018.
The advantages identified for this approach are either of a general nature – lower costs,
convenience for the respondent, integrity of data, etc.; or of a specific nature – the
qualitative nature of the variables of research and the general difficulty makes the poorly
operational questionnaire for direct administration, – administration (distribution by post,
e-mail, modern means of communication are particular cases of self-administration) is a
solution that gives the respondent the time to respond (Savoiu and Dinu, 2012).
As a first step, the questionnaire was subjected to the pilot test procedure on a number of 25
students to ensure its clarity and comprehensiveness (Dinu, Dabija & Savoiu, 2016).
During this phase the following aspects were checked: • if the terms used are easy to
understand and do not lead to confusion; • if the order of questions does not lead to
negative reactions; • if the question form allows gathering the necessary information; • if
some questions are not helpful; • if the input and link texts are sufficient and effective; • if
the answers to closed questions are exhaustive; • if the questionnaire response time does not
exceed 10 minutes; • if the number of open questions is not too big to tire the respondent.
In order to synthesize the collected data, a factorial analysis was performed that allowed
identification of the most significant factors capable of describing the coordinates of the
investigated population. The accuracy of the method was verified using the Bartlett and
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin tests. The KMO test made it possible to determine the effectiveness of
applying the factor analysis to the data collected (Bratianu & Vatamanescu, 2017). In order
to perform factorial analysis, the main component extraction is the first step, followed by
the rotation process, where we chose the Varimax variant (Arkkelin, 2014).
An analysis of the internal consistency, namely Cronbach's Alpha, of the measurement
scale was performed at the level of the identified factors to test the reliability of all the
variables. The test results indicated values greater than 0.7, proving a good internal
consistency: factor 1 = 0.946, factor 2 = 0.939 and factor 3 = 0.893.
In order to verify the hypotheses of differences in student reporting to the three categories
of factors by gender, faculty profile and study cycle, we used a series of nonparametric tests
that correspond to the centralized data typology. In the case of alternative (dichotomic)
grouping we used the Mann-Whitney U test and in the case of non-alternate variables I
chose the Kruskal Wallis test.
3. Interpretation of survey results
Application of Bartlett test retrieved a value smaller than 0,001 allows us to conclude that
the correlation matrix is not an identity matrix and consequently the factorial analysis can
be applied. Both the Bartlett test and the KMO test suggested a very good accuracy for
using the factor analysis for the present research. More specifically, the KMO test value of
0.96 indicates that correlation patterns are relatively compact and factorial analysis can be
used on this sample. The values of the Barlett tests indicate the suitability of the research
method for the obtained database, as follows: Chi-square = 8694,65 and Sig. = 0,000.
The values of each factor revealed by the factorial analysis are representing the variance
explained by that linear composition (Savoiu și Dinu, 2012; Dinu, Dabija & Savoiu, 2016).
Thus, it can be seen that the first factor explains about 42% of the total variance and the
cumulative first 4 factors account for about 62% of the total variance. The component
matrix retrieved by the Varimax rotation method indicates 3 factors around which the
results obtained for the questions in the applied questionnaire are grouped together. The
first factor includes 14 variables / indicators, factor 2 includes 13 variables / indicators and
factor 3 includes 8 variables / indicators.
Throughout the questionnaire, all the variables related to the knowledge categories were
measured on a semantic scale, assessing the degree to which the respondent agreed with the
presented claims. A Likert scale was used in seven steps from 1 (total agreement) to 7 (total
disagreement).
At the level of the variables grouped under factor no. 1, which refers to the knowledge and
willingness of students to participate in bioeconomy research activities, there is generally a
moderate degree of approval, the average of answers being 2,71. This situation can be
explained by the fact that not all respondents are familiar with the specific notions of
bioeconomy, with students being selected from different faculties with different profiles
(social sciences, human science, engineering science, computer science and other).
Regarding the variables grouped within the other two factors (rational knowledge and
emotional and spiritual knowledge) the degree of approval is slightly higher (averages
being 2,36 and 2,49 respectively).
Analyzing the results of the Mann-Whitney U test on the differences in the three factors
(categories of knowledge) between male and female students, we can say that the
differences are not significant (Table no.1).
Table no. 1. Mann-Whitney U Test of difference between male and female students
Gender Sample’s volume Mean Rank
Male
139
183.23
Factor 1
Female
233
188.45
Male
139
180.40
Factor 2
Female
233
190.14
Male
139
194.04
Factor 3
Female
233
182.00

At the level of factor 1 (bioeconomy knowledge) we have an average of 183.23 grades for
male students and an average of 188.45 for female students, which is a small, negligible
difference (Sig. = 0,651). The data is similar for factor 2 (emotional and spiritual
knowledge) as we identify small differences between rank averages, like 180.40 for male
students and 190.14 for female students (Sig. = 0,398). A slightly bigger difference but
insignificant from statistical point of view is found in relation to factor 3 (rational
knowledge), the average grade for male students is 194.04 and for female students of 182
(Sig. = 0,296).
Neither for the Mann-Whitney U test results on the differences in the three factors
(knowledge categories) between students from social sciences profile faculties and those
from technical profile faculties can be said to be significant (Table no.2).
from different profile faculties
Faculty profile
Sample’s volume Mean Rank
Engineering/Technical
147
189.72
Factor 1
Social-humane
239
195.82
Engineering/Technical
147
198.13
Factor 2
Social-humane
239
190.65
Engineering/Technical
147
189.07
Factor 3
Social-humane
239
196.22

At the level of factor 1 (bioeconomy knowledge), we have a ranks average of 189.72 grades
for students from technical profiles and an average of 195.82 for students from social
sciences profiles, indicating a difference that is insignificant (Sig. = 0,602). For factor 2
(emotional and spiritual knowledge) again, small differences are found between rank
ranges, 198.13 for students from technical profiles and 190.65 for students from social
sciences profiles (Sig. = 0,522). A similar situation, insignificant from a statistical point of
view, is found in relation to factor 3 (rational knowledge), the average rank for the students
from the technical profiles is 189.07 and for the students from the social sciences 196.22
(Sig. = 0,541).
If from the perspective of the gender and the profile of the faculty we did not find
significant differences in the level of the three factors (knowledge categories), the situation
is different from the perspective of the cycle of studies (Bachelor's, Master's and
Doctorate). Analyzing the results of the Kruskal Wallis test for independent samples on the
differences in the three factors (knowledge categories) for students from the three education
cycles, we can say that the differences are significant (Table no. 3).
Table no. 3. Kruskal Wallis Test of difference between education cycles
Study cycle Sample’s volume Mean Rank
Bachelor
260
200.76
Factor 1
Master
107
186.09
Doctorate
19
135.95
Bachelor
260
202.01
Factor 2
Master
107
183.43
Doctorate
19
133.74
Bachelor
260
201.82
Factor 3
Master
107
187.20
Doctorate
19
115.11

At factor 1, the willingness to extend their bioeconomy knowledge, we have an average of
200.76 for undergraduate students, 186.09 for those in the master's cycle, and an average of
135.95 for undergraduate students at the doctoral cycle, which indicates a significant
difference in these three categories of students (Sig. = 0,036). The lowest score, which
differentiates the most obviously from the other two, is found in the students of the doctoral
cycle, indicating somewhat greater reluctance presented by them in addressing research
topics related to the field of bioeconomy. This issue can be argued by the fact that the
course of doctoral research is relatively rigid, the research theme chosen is difficult to

change, especially if the coverage of such a thematic area was not considered in the
research plan. Therefore, we consider recommending a stronger promotion among
coordinating teachers of the importance of this thematic area in the field of doctoral
research. For bachelor and master courses, this reticence is not noticeable and it is
gratifying that students are open to deepening and having research concerns in the
bioeconomy field. From this perspective, a curricular adaptation is recommended, which
includes a larger proportion of disciplines related to bioeconomy.
For factor 2 (emotional and spiritual knowledge), we find a similar picture, as there are
significant differences between rank ranges, 202.01 for undergraduate students, 183.43 for
master students and 133.74 for students from the doctoral cycle (Sig. = 0,020). Again, the
lowest score, which differs significantly from the other two, is found in the students of the
doctoral cycle, indicating that the doctoral students feel to a lesser extent the influence of
the academic environment on the orientation of students to the thematic area of
bioeconomy.
The differences appear to be more pronounced in terms of factor 3 reporting (rational
knowledge), the average rank for students in the Bachelor's cycle is 201.82, for Master's
students is 187.20, and for students in the cycle PhD is 115.11 (Sig. = 0,004). These
differences indicate that with the advancement of university cycle education, students
become increasingly aware of the technical and material endowment needs of specialized
teachers to enable them to conduct a sustained and performing research activity in related
bioeconomy.
Conclusions
Bioeconomy is considered at European and world level as a fundamental source of
competitive advantage throughout the transfer of scientific knowledge generated by
research centers and universities to innovative industries in order to produce goods using
renewable biological resources from soil and sea – such as crops, forests, fish, animals,
microorganisms as well as waste – as raw materials for food, feed and industrial and energy
production. Because the field of bioeconomy is a new and extremely complex one, it
requires an advanced knowledge base on different niches. Universities must seriously take
a participatory role in facilitating companies' access to innovations and their
implementation so as to provide society as a whole with sustainable solutions for enhancing
competitiveness.
This idea must be transposed into a convergent national policy, which means that with the
efforts invested in educating students, a certain degree of development can also be achieved
for the area of the bioeconomy – when they will integrate into the labor market. In order for
the previous policy projection to become viable, universities should address and implement
a strategic management process within a series of actions applied to the educational
process, the research process, the inclusion of highly qualified young people in the labor
market and the process of collaborating with enterprises.
The theoretical implications aim at changing the scientific perspective on intellectual
capital and introducing the new entropic model, both in terms of its principles of
functioning and the characteristics of its components, namely rational knowledge,
emotional knowledge and spiritual knowledge.

The entropic model of intellectual capital is particularly relevant to top managers because it
offers the possibility of evaluating the organizational resources by independent and nonoverlapping components. Dynamics of knowledge and intellectual capital must be the
priority concern of managers as they are permanent active sources for innovation, creation
and solutions.
For the category of "policy makers" the advantage lies in the fact that there is a more
precise delimitation of the components of the entropic model of intellectual capital that
preserves their intellectual dimension and independence. This perspective is managerial and
not accounting.
Thus, we considered it important to evaluate to what extent the essential components of the
entropic model of intellectual capital influence students’ behavior in terms of their
attractiveness and availability to improve / specialize in the current field of bioeconomy.
By using the main component analysis method, we were able to identify 3 factors around
which the results recorded for the questions in the applied questionnaire are grouped
together. Thus we can say that the first two hypotheses of the study are confirmed,
according to which we state that the formation of human capital in the field of bioeconomy
is influenced by the transfer of rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge to the students.
The descriptive statistics obtained from the application of the questionnaire at the students
of “Ştefan cel Mare” University of Suceava showed that there is a major availability of
students regarding the current themes of bioeconomy research, which allows us to assume
that hypothesis number 3 is also confirmed.
Applying the Mann-Whitney U test to the collected data has allowed us to point out that
there are no significant differences between the students by gender in the evaluation of
rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge transfer and in the field of bioeconomy at the
level of the Stefan cel Mare University, from Suceava. This allows us to assume that
hypothesis number 4 is confirmed.
Also, through the same type of test, we pointed out that there are no significant differences
between the students from the social-humane faculties and those from the technical
faculties regarding the evaluation of the transfer of rational, emotional and spiritual
knowledge in the field of bioeconomy. This fact is encouraging and allows the use of a
unitary university-level strategy to popularize bioeconomy research topics at the students'
level. Concluding the above, we can say that hypothesis number 5 is not confirmed.
The Kruskal Wallis Test for testing statistical independence revealed that there are
significant differences between the students in the three education cycles in assessing the
transfer of rational, emotional and spiritual knowledge and in the field of bioeconomy at the
level of “Ştefan cel Mare” University in Suceava. The test showed that the greatest
difference is found among the students of the doctoral cycle, indicating a greater reluctance
on the part of them in addressing bioeconomy research themes. Therefore, we believe that
stronger promotion among coordinating teachers of the importance of this thematic area for
doctoral research is required, and curricular adaptation, including a larger proportion of bioeconomy disciplines, is also recommended. Conclusively, we can say that hypothesis
number 6 is confirmed.
In this analytic approach we evaluate to what extent these types of knowledge (as essential
components of the entropic model of intellectual capital) are influencing the behavior of
students. Thus, based on the results of the statistically processed data from the investigation,
we can discover the influence of each type of knowledge on students’ behavior and we can
further identify the composition of the most powerful influence factors.
The main action directions for universities for the purpose of developing the European
bioeconomy field could be synthesized as follows: to foster new skills important for
science; to have an integrative approach of research, education and co-operation; to create
partnerships between universities, research centers and businesses; to enlarge inter and
multidisciplinary approaches; to intensify knowledge and technology transfer and not the
least to increase the public awareness and thus to facilitate the communication of science
towards the society. We note that no similar research has been carried out with the
application of a questionnaire aiming to identify the intellectual capital elements according
to the entropic model. In the future, these results will be able to contribute to the
programming of the educational process and to the transfer of bioeconomy knowledge to
students in order to improve and develop the human capital that is a product of the
university.
The main limitation is represented by the investigated collectivity, represented only by the
students of “Ştefan cel Mare” University of Suceava, with heterogeneous distributions
across the 6 counties of the North-East Region. Though, we consider that by analogy, the
survey might be successfully applied to students from other universities also. Another
limitation is represented by the short/limited period possible to be allocated for the survey,
which restricted the number of the variables included in the questionnaire. A third
limitation specific for this survey, we consider to be the relatively low number of
respondents for the study domains which influence greatly the level of knowledge, the
types of knowledge and the quality of knowledge feedback. For the future continuation of
this research the stated limitations should be eliminated in order to obtain much more
relevant results.


