

Introduction
Two classifications of supply chains include forward (traditional) supply chains, and reverse
supply chains. Reverse logistics (RL) has been studies in some research papers. RL is a
combination of logistic activities ranging from used products that returned by people to
products that become usable in the market [20, 23, 26]. Recovery activities are performed
on returned products. These recovery activities include the acquisition of used products,
reverse logistics, product disposition, repair or remanufacturing, remarketing, and recycling
[26, 43, 52]. The goal of RL is to gain economic and environmental values from returned
products; however, the aim of forward (traditional) logistics is to provide products for
customers [2]. A combination of forward and reverse logistics forms closed-loop supply chain
(CLSC) networks [5, 26, 38, 54]. Paper recycling and copier remanufacturing are two
instances of CLSCs [21]. Figure 1 illustrates a general CLSC network.
The pallet industry has become an indispensable part of distribution supply chains because
it can aid in the efficient and reliable transportation of products. It is estimated that 2 billion
pallets are used in the US market every day [12]. There are various types of pallets like solid
wood, plastic, paper, metal, and wood-based composite pallets. Wooden pallets and plastic
pallets are more popular than other kinds. Looking at the pallet market of North America, the
sales of new and refurbished pallets will expand significantly [53].
The major advantages of wooden pallets are low material and production costs, which
obtained an estimated 90 to 95% pallet market share in the US [12]. On the other hand, plastic
pallets have advantages, such as durability, handling safety, quality, and low cost per use [46].
Using both wooden and plastic pallets involves economic and environmental factors.
This research has three main objectives. First, it aims to provide a unique overview of the
pallet industry including wooden and plastic pallets. In addition, this paper discusses a novel
perspective on the reverse logistics of pallets. The second objective is identifying and

Fig. 1 A general closed-loop supply chain network (forward supply chain


155

analyzing strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats related to establishing a company’s
plastic pallet reverse logistics system in an innovative way. We have searched peer-reviewed
international journals (through well-known websites such as Elsevier, Taylor & Francis,
Springer, and Google Scholar) and some well-known databases to collect data related to
plastic pallets. The third objective is to develop an optimization model which maximizes
profit, and find the best facility locations in a pallet reverse logistics network.
The second section presents a literature review related to wooden and plastic pallets. Third
section is devoted to the problem statement, and in the fourth section discusses the characteristics of plastic pallets. Next, in the fifth section introduces the forward supply chains of plastic
pallets. Then, the sixth section investigates the reverse supply chains of plastic pallets. The
seventh section provides a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis for a
specific company. A mathematical model and its application are provided in the eighth section.
Lastly, in the ninth section discusses conclusions.

Literature review
Some literature review publications have focused on CLSC networks and reverse logistics
(e.g., [2, 20, 24–26, 38]).
There are several types of pallets used in markets, such as metal, plastic, solid wood, soft
wood, corrugate paperboard, and wood composite pallets. Pallets of different materials have
their own merits and can meet certain customers’ specific needs. The advantages of solid wood
pallets include better stacking and purchase prices compared to plastic pallets. For instance,
some plastic pallets may be five times more expensive than comparable wooden pallets.
However, plastic pallets have become the new product of the pallet industry [13]. The literature
of pallets including wooden and plastics pallets are reviewed in this section.

Wooden pallets
There are four general types of wooden pallets, including solid wood (oak species), softwood
(southern pine species), composite wood-plastic, and paperboard wood. Two sanitation and
sterilization regulatory standards are used internationally, which are the International Standard
for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPM), and the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC).
Approaches for sanitizing wooden pallets generally include heat treatment, fumigation (by using
methyl bromide), and the ISPM 15 [10]. There are three general end-of-life options for wooden
pallets. The first option is mulching, which is a recycling option. Technically, mulching is
downcycling, which is a demanding application due to the need for transportation and additional
energy. The second end-of-life option for wooden pallets is landfilling. This option can recover
energy since the anaerobic decomposition of wood generates methane gas, which can be captured
by modern landfill systems. The last option, incineration, also can recover energy, but it results in
the emission of greenhouse gases [10]. However, combusting wooden pallets that have been
treated with methyl bromide will liberate toxic and irritating chemicals [10].
Wooden pallets have a long history that has permeated various industries in our daily lives.
Wooden pallets are known for being environmentally friendly due to their easy biological



life-span, recycling, and industry capacity. Using the nonparametric Wilcoxon test, Buehlmann
et al. [12] presented an assessment of recycling and industry capacity because of a proposed
ban on landfilling wooden pallets in North Carolina. North Carolina’s legislature had proposed
banning the landfilling of pallets for several years. The researchers made several noteworthy
discoveries. Firstly, the majority of pallets that have been used in the USA are solid wood
pallets [12]. Secondly, in the USA, the program for recycling wooden pallets produces an
estimated 450 million new pallets annually, and the stock is replenished every 4 years [12].
Thirdly, Buehlmann et al.’s survey identified four major recycling options for wooden pallets:
20% of pallets received by a recycling operation were reused, 45% were refurbished, 19%
were recycled, and 16% were carried to ground [12]. Lastly, more than half of respondents in
the industry (according the researcher’s survey) thought that a ban on landfilling pallets was a
good idea. Only 18% pointed out that it is a bad idea [12].
Some researchers have also analyzed carbon footprint comparisons using wooden pallets.
Alvarez and Rubio [4] used the EUR-flat wooden pallet as a research sample, and they
concluded that the compound method based on financial accounts (MC3, an acronym derived
from método compuesto de las cuentas contables) is better than the process-based analysis
method. The details of their findings can be divided into three aspects: Firstly, greenhouse gas
emissions shown in MC3 are 22% higher than the emissions shown in the process-based
analysis. Secondly, the process-based analysis shows greater detail in the first life-cycle phase
than the MC3 method. Thirdly, the MC3 method drastically reduces calculation time. Alvarez
and Rubio also mentioned that the MC3 method analysis includes physical, organizational,
and operational boundaries.
Some researchers have focused on the problem of loading wooden pallets. For instance,
Nakandala et al. [41] examined an optimization model for the loading problem by using a
genetic algorithm and fuzzy logic methods. Terno et al. [50] used the three-dimensional
solution approach to load a set of distinct products with specific quantities on pallets while
minimizing the number of pallets needed. Tornese et al. [51] analyzed the carbon footprint in
the remanufacturing processes of the returned pallets. They analyzed the data obtained from 12
centers in North America.
Many researchers have analyzed materials [16, 19, 31, 42, 47] in addition to handling
processes and disposal methods [9, 10, 22, 49]. A few researchers have considered the
activities in the manufacturing stage [1, 30, 42]. Table 1 shows a summary of related papers.

Plastic pallets
In this paper, we focus on the forward and reverse supply chains of plastic pallets. Plastic
pallets are made of different types of plastics. They are manufactured and applied frequently in
Europe and US, spurred by the adoption of the ISPM 15. Based on the regular standards in
wood packaging industry, the material should be fumigated or heat treated according to the
ISPM 15 guidelines. The European Pallet Association which has been established in 1991,
manages the standards for European pallets. The pallets utilized to export products from US
should also meet these standards. Some American and European companies consider plastic as
a useful alternative to the wooden material that is used in shipping and packaging pallets.
Nakandala et al. [41]
Terno et al. [50]
Alvarez and Rubio [4]
Scheerer et al. [46]
Bush et al. [14]
Elia and Gnoni [18]
Kim et al. [31]
Corbière-Nicollier
et al. [16]
Emiliani and Stec [19]
Singh and Walker [47]
Bilbao et al. [10]
Gasol et al. [22]
Sreenual et al. [49]
Abbott [1]
Kellenberger et al. [30]
Ng et al. [42]

Authors

✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔

✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔

Wooden
pallets

Type

✔

✔
✔

Plastic
pallets

Table 1 Classification of some papers

✔

Assessment
of recycling

✔
✔

Loading
problem

✔

Assessment
of greenhouse
gas emission

✔
✔

Assessment
of material

✔

Closed-loop
system for pallet
management

✔
✔

✔
✔

Material
analysis

✔
✔
✔

✔
✔
✔

Handling processes and Manufacturing
disposal practices
stage



Fig. 2 Plastic pallets

In addition to the literature on wooden pallets, a few papers have focused on plastic
pallets. Bush et al. [14] discussed pallet recycling and material substitution. They provided
information about trends in the use of new wood materials and in the recovery of pallets.
The authors also discuss plastic recovery in their paper. In an important publication, Clarke
[15] provided useful information about the pallet industry; pallet terminology; pallet
materials (wood, plastic, composite wood, paper-based, and metal pallets); and factors
regarding the balance design of pallets (including strength, stiffness, durability, functionality, and price). Aldaz-Carroll and Raballan [3] examined pallets to illustrate the impact of
multiple standards on trade costs. These authors also discussed the reasons for having
different pallet sizes and the related costs, and they considered exporters from less
developed countries. Bilbao et al. [10] discussed the characteristics of both wooden and
plastic pallets. Their investigation included an overview of the pallet industry, pallet
design, pallet materials, embodied energy, sustainable development, and life-cycle assessments. The authors used a mathematical model (mixed-integer linear programming) to
design a system that determines the combinations of pallets (type, quantity, and pallet
management system) for product distribution and that balances environmental impacts and
costs overall. Michel [39] provided the results of a survey on pallet trends, including
purchasing decisions, wooden pallet trends, and the coexistence of block and stringer
pallets. Table 2 classifies some papers on plastic pallets. In summary, there are a few
papers in the literature that have focused on plastic pallet supply chain investigations.

Problem statement
A company in the province of Nova Scotia, Canada, is a recycler/manufacturer of new and
used pallets, crates, dunnage, and other wooden packaging materials. The company is certified
via the CFIA for the production of heat-treated wooden packaging materials in both new and
Clarke [15]
Bilbao et al. [10]
Aldaz-Carroll and
Raballan [3]
Michel [39]

Authors

Plastic
pallets

✔
✔
✔
✔

✔

Wooden
pallets

✔
✔
✔
✔

✔

Type

Table 2 Some papers about plastic pallets

✔

✔
✔
✔

Materials Advantages and
disadvantages

✔
✔

Processes and
energy consumption

✔

✔

✔
✔
✔
✔

Market segmentation Price
and trends

✔

Captive or closed-loop
warehouse environments

✔

Recycling
options



During its operations with used wooden pallets, the company experienced the issue of
plastic pallets accumulating with no obvious reuse or recycling options. Numerous
facilities with which the company is in contact have also accumulated these pallets. The
company thinks that this is a widespread problem within Nova Scotia. It has attempted to
move these pallets back into the supply stream but has had little success due to the
nonstandard size of most of the pallets and the fact that most operations have storage
and handling equipment geared towards standard-size wooden pallets. It appears that a lot
of countries importing to this area use plastic pallets, especially large Asian importers. If
this is a trend that continues, the province will likely see a steady increase in the amount of
surplus plastic pallets with no apparent reuse opportunities in place. The company is
interested in establishing a reverse logistics system for plastic pallets. The managers are
eager to know strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats related to this topic. In
addition, they are interested in knowing the best facility locations in a pallet CLSC
network which is shown in Fig. 3. Suppliers provide the materials for the manufacturer.
The manufacturer can remanufacture and manufacture the pallets. The pallets are
transported to distributors by the manufacturer. After that, they are sent to customers
(transportation companies). Some pallets are returned to recycling centers after use. A
portion of the returned pallets are disposed. Others are transported to the producer to be
remanufactured.
Both strategic and planning factors play important roles in this network. Strategic decisions
comprise determining the selected supplier(s), the selected location(s) for the plant(s), the
selected distributor(s) to distribute the products, and the selected recycling center(s). Planning
decisions contain the quantity of the purchased products from each supplier, and the quantity
of every part in the network.

Characteristics of plastic pallets
The majority of the manufacturing materials of plastic pallets are different resin formulations.
Some of these can be recovered, and some cannot. There are three common materials used for
plastic pallets in the market: high-density polyethylene (HDPE) reinforced plastic, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) reinforced plastic, and resin formulations [10, 14, 39].
Third-party service is an important area in the pallet industry. Manufacturers realized
that customers need more service to beyond only serve begin and end with supporting
and protecting a load of plastic pallets, and that’s why they provide a third-party service
for pallet disposal [14].

Distributors
Suppliers

Customers

Manufacturer
Recycling centers


161

As stated before, another important fact is that the price of plastic pallets is higher than
the price of regular wooden pallets. Plastic pallets may cost five times as much as the cost
of similar wooden pallets [14]. Depending on the different kinds of materials used in
plastic pallets (e.g., HDPE), each plastic pallet is usually around three to six times the price
of wooden pallets [15].
The most popular manufacturing process for plastic pallets is structural foam molding.
Other manufacturing processes are also used in different situations based on their advantages
and disadvantages. These processes contain injection molding, rotational molding, profile
extrusion, compression molding, and thermoforming [15]. Foam molding and injection
molding are the best ways to manufacture high volumes of standard plastic pallets, while
profile extrusion and rotational molding are more suitable for manufacturing one hundred
pallets in a unique design [15].
Some publications in the literature have pointed out the advantages and disadvantages of
plastic pallets as compared with other types of pallets. The commonly accepted advantages of
plastic pallets are durability, cleanliness, lack of fasteners, lack of bugs, weather resistance, and
design potential [15]. General disadvantages are higher prices, difficulties with making
prototypes, low friction, low stiffness, and lack of repair options [15]. Plastic pallets are
generally in captive or closed-loop warehouse environments, and usually 50% or more of
plastic pallets are reusable in some Asian countries [15].
Energy is an important factor in producing pallets. The manufacturing of HDPE plastic
pallets requires an energy-intensive polymer injection molding procedure or another
thermoforming operation. In contrast, transforming oak boards into pallets merely needs
simple cutting and assembly with no energy investment [10]. Choosing between plastic or
wooden pallets is a decision among using more energy-intensive plastic pallets for long time,
and using less energy-intensive wooden pallets in a short time.
Unlike wooden pallets, plastic pallets do not need to meet the requirements of the IPPC or
the ISPM 15 internationally [10]. There are generally three options for retired plastic pallets,
including recycling (which is achieved through a downcycling process), incineration (which
produces some energy), and landfilling (which does not produce energy or utilize recycling
because the pallets do not decompose) [10].

The forward supply chains of plastic pallets
A forward supply chain involves sending products from suppliers to manufacturers and
then distributers, retailers, and finally customers. Relative associations, plastic pallet
industry in Canada, and the manufacturing processes of plastic pallets are described in
this section.

Relative associations
There are some associations that play indispensable roles in the supply chains of pallets. The
Canadian Plastics Industry Association (CPIA) is a nonprofit organization that aims at
providing leadership on policies and pivotal issues regarding the life cycle of plastics. The



As the USA has a geographical advantage in the pallet industry, millions of Canadians
utilize pallets that were produced in the USA. The Reusable Plastic Container and Pallet
Association (RPCPA) has grown significantly. The RPCPA has covered all supply chain
partners such as distributors, retailers, and end-users, with a commitment to the value and
message of reuse since 1999 [29].
There are some wooden pallet relative associations that play important roles in the supply
chains of pallets. For instance, the Canadian Pallet Council (CPC) provides an exchange
system for wooden pallets. In this system, members of the CPC have the responsibility to
repair damaged pallets at particular locations. In general, there are two kinds of wooden pallet
management: One is a pallet exchange program, which means maintaining a running tally of
pallets; the other one is renting pallets. Some retailers have joined CPC’s pallet exchange
program, such as Sobeys, Shoppers Drug Mart, and Metro Inc. (Ontario and Quebec).
Divert NS (formerly known as RRFB Nova Scotia) is a nonprofit corporation in Nova
Scotia that is working to improve the province’s environment, economy, and quality of life
through recovery activities, such as reusing and recycling. Thanks to the efforts of Divert NS,
Nova Scotia has been the province with the highest beverage container recycling rate in
Canada. In addition to managing beverage recycling containers, Divert NS provides funding to
support local environmental protection activities.

The plastic pallet industry in Canada
Plastic pallets are used frequently across the whole food industry. It is not difficult to imagine
how many plastic pallets travel highways every day to transport meats, fruits, and other foods.
Plastic pallets have such advantages as durability, cleanliness, and light weight. Therefore,
pallets have lots of market shares, particularly in big Canadian grocery and franchising
companies, such as Sobeys, No-Frills, NSLC, Superstore, Burger King, Subway, McDonalds,
etc. Generally, most plastic pallets are used in closed-loop supply chain networks, which
means empty plastic pallets go back and forth between points in the supply chain [11, 15, 36].
Manufacturers of plastic pallets have spread out through domestic and international markets,
including the USA, Europe, Asia, etc. The majority of domestic plastic pallet manufacturers
are located outside of Nova Scotia.

The manufacturing processes of plastic pallets
As stated previously, there are six general processes for making plastic pallets, each with their
own advantages and disadvantages regarding costs, time cycles, technical requirements, etc.
These processes include structural foam molding, thermoforming, rotational molding, highpressure injection molding, compression molding, and profile extrusion.
In high-pressure injection molding, two major parts of an injection are molded: a mold and
a heated barrel with a rotating screw. The virgin plastic (usually copolymer polypropylene or
high-density polyethylene resin) and colorants are melted together in the barrel. After that, the
melted plastic is injected into the mold, which is used to champ it together, and high force
pressure is applied [33].
Structural foam molding is a kind of low-pressure injection molding with a mold that can be

163

In compression molding, different types of recycled materials can be used, including
various plastics, rubbers, synthetic resins, and other recycled waste products. There are two
steps for this process. The first step is loading two-piece molds with materials manually,
robotically, or through extruders. Once loaded, a press forces the mold closed, and pressure
forces the materials to fill the mold cavity [33].
Rotational molding usually begins with loading granular or powdered plastic materials into
a shell-like mold. Two perpendicular planes heat and rotate the mold to distribute and fuse the
materials to the mold. The materials for this process usually are linear low-density polyethylene and cross-linked polyethylene [17].
Profile extrusion is a process that is like the construction of wooden pallets. Industrial
regrind, post-consumer recycled materials, and even wood fiber can be the raw materials in
this process [48]. Raw materials are melted and forced through an extruder. After cooling
down, the extruded materials are cut to size like lumber and fastened with nails, screws, glue,
or heat welds [57].

The reverse supply chains of plastic pallets
In a reverse supply chain, customers return products to remanufacturers. This section discusses
some points related to the reverse supply chains of plastic pallets.
Based on our research, it is hard to estimate the total number of plastic pallets that are
circulated/received in Nova Scotia. In our opinion, the best way to find an answer is preparing
a survey and distributing it in certain areas. For example, we could mail the survey to the store
managers of grocery stores located in Halifax (the capital of Nova Scotia). The following
questions could be asked in the survey: How many plastic pallets are distributed and stored per
day? Do the plastic pallets need to be transported directly back to the suppliers? Is the
distribution of plastic pallets managed by a third-party logistics company? In addition, the
survey could provide useful information about plastic pallet SWOT factors, which include
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
As mentioned in the previous sections, there are very few plastic pallet manufacturers located in Nova Scotia. Furthermore, the supply chains of plastic pallets cross
national and international boundaries because of the role plastic pallets play in the
distribution of products.
Generally, every plastic pallet is part of at least one reverse supply chain system because the
main material in plastic pallets is polyethylene, which is almost 100% recycled content
material. Plastic pallets play a critical role for all firms, especially for logistics service
providers (LSPs) [37]. Closed-loop and open-loop pallet management systems are widespread.
The variation in reverse logistics processes is the major reason that closed-loop networks are
complex in the plastic pallet industry.
Reverse logistics of pallets exists in some organizations. Elia and Gnoni [18] utilized
an observation approach to analyze the reverse supply chains of pallets. The authors
studied thirty Italian LSPs. The reverse supply chain models in these thirty companies
stipulated that the LSPs could choose to return empty pallets if they wish, but the reverse
flows of empty pallets have to be managed from downstream companies to upstream



flows to an empty pallet storage system can take three forms: new pallets shipped from
pallet suppliers, old pallets gained from the unloading activities of palletized deliveries
from upstream customers, and old pallets returned to an LSP’s storage center from its
downstream customers (e.g., final retailers). Some of the outbound pallet flows from the
LSP’s storage are defective old pallets that usually are sent for disposal or sent to
companies for recycling.
Without LSPs’ involvement, the most common reverse supply chain of plastic pallets
usually performs as part of the closed-loop systems of assembly plants returning containers
and pallets to vendors. Witt in the 1990s published many articles indicating that plastic pallets
involved 10% of the total pallet use market in America [56]. During that period, that market
was based on a closed-loop system in which clean pallets were required. There were some
managers among plastic pallet producers that pointed out that the closed-loop system was the
key to both environmental and economic developments [55].
After decades of development in the plastic pallet industry, and instead of only
providing warranties for products, lots of plastic pallet manufacturers now provide
various customer care services, such as account management, product tracking, product
washing, product repair, and recycling programs. In other words, nowadays the manufacturers of plastic pallets customize not only their products but also reverse supply
chains in order to maximize profits.
Buckhorn Canada Inc. is a plastic pallet manufacturer that is one of North America’s leaders
related to reusable plastic packaging systems. Buckhorn provides a closed-loop system for its
plastic products, which the company calls product management options. These options include
tracking, washing, repair, and recycling programs.
Defective plastic pallets can be reground into small portions and reused in other products or
pallets based on desired applications. Some manufacturers use a lot of recycled plastics in their
products, which always depends on the requirements of the products. However, some manufacturers do not regrind their own products [55].

SWOT analysis
SWOT analysis is applied in this research. The aim of the SWOT analysis in this paper is to
help the company under study to develop strategic planning for transferring its manufacture of
wooden pallets to the manufacture of plastic pallets.
SWOT analysis is a well-known technique and strategic management tool. Several
researchers have utilized SWOT analyses [6, 7, 40, 44]. Typically, SWOT analysis can
be inserted into a SWOT matrix, which some experts consider a consequence of an
organization’s internal and external diagnoses [27]. The analyzer first considers internal
strengths and weaknesses (at the 2*2 grid). Then, the bottom of the SWOT grid
including opportunities and threats are considered [45]. SWOT analysis has been
extensively applied in different disciplines to investigate problems from a strategic
planning perspective [35]. Helms and Nixon [28] stated that, over the past decade,
the SWOT analysis approach has concentrated on analyzing companies to recommend
strategic activities. Generally, the SWOT analysis approach can help portray what

165

Table 3 The SWOT factors
Strengths (internal)
Weaknesses (internal)
W1. Shortage of staff
S1. Extensive manufacturing knowledge and
W2. Lack of investment
experience in pallet industry
W3. Limitations in the company’s current
S2. Access to lots of land and space
transportation and delivery system
S3. The location of the company
S4. Access (connection) to potential customers
Opportunities (external)
Threats (external)
T1. The monopoly market due to large companies
O1. Lack of local competitors
T2. Fluctuation in the Canadian dollar exchange rate
O2 Knowledge of the local market and businesses
T3. Competition between internal wooden
O3. Provincial and national funding support
and plastic pallets
O4. The benefits of the plastic pallet industry
O5. The reception of many retired plastic pallets

Strengths (internal)
S1. Extensive manufacturing knowledge and experience in the pallet industry: The
majority of the company’s internal strengths derive from experiences related to wooden
pallet manufacturing. The company has a long history of manufacturing wooden pallets.
Both wooden pallets and plastic pallets are subcategories of the pallet industry. As a
result, there are some similarities in their manufacturing processes.
S2. Access to lots of land and space: Since it is located on a big piece of land, the
company has lots of space for setting up new facilities, warehouses, and machines to
manufacture plastic pallets.
S3. The location of the company: The company has a good location. It is only a few
minutes away from a main highway in Nova Scotia. In addition, it is located in the middle
of the province and close to the capital of the province (Halifax).
S4. Access (connection) to potential customers: The company has already gained some
market share in the provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. The market share can
be converted into potential customers for plastic pallets.

Weaknesses (internal)
W1. Shortage of staff: The company has a small staff. In addition, there is a lack of
internal experts on the field of manufacturing plastic pallets. The company should
hire more staff, especially experts, in the future in order to be successful in the plastic
pallet industry.
W2. Lack of investment: The company’s current machinery and equipment are devoted to
the manufacture of wooden pallets. The company should invest more in order to be
successful in the plastic pallets industry. Investment may be a challenge for the company
because of its size.
W3. Limitations in the company’s current transportation and delivery system:
Currently, the maximum traveling distance and distribution of products for the



Opportunities (external)
O1. Lack of local competitors: There are no industrial competitors located in Nova Scotia
that manufacture plastic pallets. Therefore, the company has the potential to be the first
local supplier of plastic pallets.
O2. Knowledge of the local market and businesses: The company is familiar with
the local economic situation. As a result, it is able to be flexible and responsive
to the trends of local changes. Nova Scotia is one of the largest seafood output
provinces on the east coast of North America, which can be an advantage for the
company if it wants to enter the new market based on the logistic services of the
seafood industry.
O3. Provincial and national funding support: Plastic pallets can be a new
manufacturing product in Nova Scotia since there is no local company competitor. The majority of plastic pallet materials can be recycled. Thus, plastic pallet
businesses and research are eligible for some of the environmental protection
programs operated by nonprofit corporations and research agencies. For instance,
Divert NS has a solid waste diversion program that includes the recycling of
plastic products.
O4. The benefits of the plastic pallet industry: As mentioned previously, plastic pallets
have several benefits such as their ability to be easily sanitized, their resistance to odor,
their lack of splintering, and their light weight [34]. Since 1997, these benefits have
caused plastic pallets to become more and more popular in grocery distribution companies, and the trend of using plastic pallets has gone up. We believe that it is a good
moment for the company to produce these products because of the rising status of the
plastic pallet industry.
O5. The reception of many retired plastic pallets: Luckily, the company has gained lots of
retired plastic pallets because there are some plastic pallets among the returned wooden
pallets. The company has a good opportunity to do value-added manufacturing with these
free initial materials.

Threats (external)
T1. The monopoly market due to large companies: There are some big plastic pallet
manufacturers that are well-known and powerful in the grocery and fast-food industries. It
will be difficult for the company to compete with such large and powerful companies in
terms of price and market share.
T2. Fluctuation in the Canadian dollar exchange rate: The fluctuation of the Canadian dollar exchange rate is another threat if the company enters the international
market. Significant changes in the exchange rate can hurt the profits of the company
because this company is a global company and it will be competing with other
global pallet companies.
T3. Competition between internal wooden and plastic pallets: Producing and selling

167

The optimization model
A CLSC of pallets has been provided in the third section (see Fig. 3). The purpose is
determining the best locations of the facilities in the network for the mentioned company.
To configure the pallet CLSC network, an optimization model which is a mixed-integer linear
programming one is developed. Table 4 includes the information.
"



Max z ∑ ∑ ∑ f j − H j Erk T rkj − ∑ Ai X i þ ∑ Br Y r þ ∑ C l Z l þ ∑ ∑ ∑ psj þ D j Esi Psij


r k j

r

i

s i

l

j

À

Á
À
Á
þ ∑ ∑ ∑ F j þ G j Eir Qirj þ ∑ ∑ ∑ M j E kl U klj þ ∑ ∑ ∑ −a j þ b j Eli V lij þ ∑ N s W s
i r

j

k l

j

l i

j

s

Table 4 Details of the model
Sets
S: suppliers, (1 ... s ... S)
I: potential plants locations, (1 ... i ... I)
R: potential distributers locations, (1 ... r ... R)
L: potential recycling centers locations, (1 ... l ... L)
J: products (pallets), (1 ... j ... J)
K: customers locations, (1 ... k ... K)
Parameters
fj: selling price related to product j
Ns: fixed-cost, supplier s
Cl: fixed-cost, recycling center l
Ai: fixed-cost, plant i by the manufacturer
Br: fixed-cost related to selling products through the distributer r
psj: purchasing cost of product j from supplier s
Dj: transportation cost of product j per km between plants and suppliers
Esi: the distance between locations s and i
aj: cost saving of product j (due to product recovery)
bj: transportation cost of product j per km among plants and recycling centers
dkj: demand of customer k for product j
Fj: production cost related to product j
ej: percentage of the product j that is recoverable
mij: capacity, plant i for product j
glj: capacity, recycling center l for product j
xrj: capacity, distributer r for product j
osj: capacity, supplier s for product j
tkj: returned product j of customer k
Gj: transportation cost, product j per km among distributers and plants
Hj: transportation cost, product j per km among customers and distributers
Mj: transportation cost, of product j per km among recycling centers and customers
Variables
Zl: 1, if the recycling center which is located in site l is utilized to supply used pallets, 0, otherwise
Yr: 1, if the distributer which is located in site r is utilized to sell the pallets, 0, otherwise
Xi: 1, if a plant of the manufacturer is located and set up at potential site i, 0, otherwise
Ws: 1, if the supplier s is selected, 0, otherwise
Psij: number of product j purchased for plant i from supplier s
Trkj: number of product j sold by distributer r to customer k
Vlij: number of returned product j from recycling center l to plant i
Uklj: number of returned product j from customer k to recycling center l



Subject to
∑ Qirj ≥ ∑ T rkj
i

j; r

ð1Þ

j; i

ð2Þ

k

∑ Psij þ ∑ V lij ¼ ∑ Qirj
s

r

l

∑ T rkj ≥ ∑ U klj
r

ð3Þ

j; k

l

∑ T rkj ≤ d kj

j; k

ð4Þ

r

∑ V lij ≤ e j ∑ U klj
i

ð5Þ

j; l

k

∑ U klj ¼ tkj

j; k

ð6Þ

r

ð7Þ

i

ð8Þ

l

∑ ∑ Qirj ≤ Y r ∑ xrj
j

i

j

∑ ∑ Psij þ ∑ ∑ V lij ≤ X i ∑ mij
s j

j

l

j

∑ ∑ Psij ≤ W s ∑ osj
j

i

∑ ∑ U klj ≤ Z l ∑ g lj
k

s

ð9Þ

j

j

l

ð10Þ

j

X i ; Y r ; Z l ; W s ∈ f0; 1g
Psij ; Qirj ; T rkj ; U klj ; V lij ≥ 0

s; l; r; i

ð11Þ

l; k; r; i; s; j

ð12Þ

The objective is to maximize the profit in the CLSC network. The selling price is

169

and return, respectively. Constraints (5, 7, 8, 9, 10) are about opening facilities. Binary and
nonnegative variables are considered in Constraints (11, 12).
The mathematical formulation has been utilized for configuration of a CLSC in Nova
Scotia, Canada. The map of Nova Scotia has been illustrated in Fig. 4. There are three
main regions in Nova Scotia including Cape Breton, Halifax, and Queens. It is assumed
that the demand of market k for product j (dkj) is 1 % of population of the market. We
utilized the data in 2011 census of Canada to estimate the population. It is supposed that
the return (fkj) is 10 % of the demand. Two kinds of pallets are considered in this
application. Furthermore, there are three potential suppliers in Sydney, Truro, and Yarmouth. Two potential plants are in Amherst and Halifax. Two distributors are potential
distributors located in Port Hawkesbury and Stewiacke. Besides, there are two recycling
centers (Liverpool and Kentville). The transportation style is considered truck. The
distances among the potential locations including suppliers, retailers, plants, markets,
and recycling centers are obtained using Maps in Google. Other parameters have been
written in Table 5.
To find the solution of the optimization model, General Algebraic Modeling System
(GAMS) is applied. The solution is found in 0.015 s. It includes 62 single variables, 40 single
equations, 239 non-zero elements, and 9 discrete variables. Figure 5 illustrates the optimal
network for the first product. We concentrate on the first product to avoid any confusion.
Supplier 1 is selected which is located in Sydney because of the good price. Halifax is chosen
as the plant location. Besides, Distributor 2 in Stewiacke is selected. In addition, the second
recycling center in Kentville is chosen.
Some sensitivity analyses and discussions can be used to validate the model. According
to the results, Supplier 1 is selected. The purchasing cost from Supplier 1 is 3. We change
the purchasing cost of product j from Supplier 1, and we assign 5 to it. Then, the problem



Table 5 Some data
Ns: 1000
tj: 60
Ai: 300,000
Hj: 0.003
Br: 1500
Cl: 1500
ej: 0.5

Gj: 0.003
aj: 3
Mj: 0.003
glj: 100,000
Fj: 8
bj: 0.003
orj: 100,000

mij: 500,000
Dj: 0.003
xsj: 400,000
p1j: 3
p2j: 5
p3j: 4

product j from Supplier 3 is 4. This result shows that the low cost is an important factor in
purchasing decision of the model. Besides, it illustrates that the mathematical model works
correctly as is expected.

Conclusions
Plastic pallets have become an essential transportation tool, especially in food supply chains.
The reverse supply chains of plastic pallets are critical from economic and environmental
perspectives. Billions of plastic pallets are on the road every day which are valuable from
economic viewpoint. Due to the various types of materials in plastic pallets (e.g., HDPE and
PET), the pallets have no natural decomposition in some cases. As a result, used plastic pallets
can potentially pollute our environment.
In summary, three main elements have been considered in this paper: a) This paper first
introduced the closed-loop supply chains of plastic pallets. In addition, this paper presented a
review on related literature with a focus on the pallet industry in Canada. Discussions then
followed on related problems in a specific company, the characteristics of plastic pallets, and

Fig. 5 The optimal CLSC network in Nova Scotia (forward flow
Manufacturer
Distributor,
Market,
Recycling center

, reverse flow


171

the forward supply chains of plastic pallets. The discussion on forward supply chains included
relative associations, the plastic pallet industry in Canada, and the manufacturing processes of
plastic pallets. We also provided useful information about the reverse supply chains of plastic
pallets and related recovery options. b) Using SWOT technique, we identified four strengths,
three weaknesses, five opportunities, and three threats regarding the company’s potential
establishment of a recovery system for plastic pallets. These factors should be considered
for the similar companies that would like to move to plastic pallet businesses. c) We developed
an optimization model to configure a pallet CLSC network. The network was formulated
considering different types of suppliers, plant locations, distribution locations, recycling
locations, products, and customer locations. Several similar network problems can be solved
by the proposed general mathematical model.
Based on our analysis, we provide the following recommendations for the company under
study, which is active in the wooden pallet industry and interested in establishing an RL plastic
pallet system:
1. Forming a partnership with a big plastic pallet manufacturer: We suggest that the company
partner and collaborate with an existing plastic pallet manufacturer. A big company will
have a lot of experience in this field. In addition, this partnership could reduce the
financial burden of running plastic pallet CLSCs.
2. Forming a partnership with a local company to enter the local market: We suggest that the
company partner with a local economically developed company (such as a local seafood
export company) in order to rent or sell plastic pallets to this company. This partnership
would help the company enter the new plastic pallet market quickly. In addition, the
partnership could be helpful in reducing the transportation cost of empty plastic pallets.
3. Establishing a system for determining the price of both new and returned plastic pallets:
Usually, it is not a challenge to set the price of new products. However, the prices of
returned products depend on various factors, such as the quality of the returned products.
Because of the variation in the quality of returned plastic pallets, it will be a challenge to
determine their prices. Therefore, it is necessary to have a systematic approach in this case.
4. Establishing a system for the inspection and separation of returned products: It will be
useful to create a reasonable system to separate and inspect different returned products
because of differences in their qualities. With this system, the company could save money
and decrease time spent during reverse logistics.
5. Forecasting the demand of plastic pallets (in Nova Scotia and greater Atlantic Canada):
Since plastic pallets can be utilized instead of wooden pallets, and the demand for plastic
pallets is unknown, we recommend that the company forecast the demand of plastic
pallets in the area before starting this business. This forecast can help the company to
estimate the capacity of its facilities.
6. Hiring new staff and providing training programs for current staff: It will be useful for the
company to train current staff (training related to plastic pallets manufacturing), recruit
new staff who are good at the management of plastic pallets, and hire technical experts on
manufacturing plastic pallets. One of the notable weaknesses identified in the SWOT
analysis is the shortage of staff (W1).
7. Considering cannibalization and its effects: The cannibalization concept occurs in the



(plastic pallets) and traditional products (wooden pallets). In this case, the demand for
plastic pallets and wooden pallets will be in competition as long as they are substitutable
for customers. In other words, an increase in the sale of plastic pallets can lead to a
decrease in the sale of wooden pallets.
This paper provides a unique perspective on the reverse logistics and recovery options of
plastic pallets in Canada. Future research for this paper can include applying more
quantitative and mathematical models to analyze the reverse logistics of plastic pallets
with focus on uncertainty. Appropriate models for forecasting demand can be developed in
this field.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Divert NS for providing support for this project. In addition,
they would like to thank the editor and reviewers for the excellent comments that improved the quality of the paper.

55. Witt C (1990) Pallets: wood isn't the only answer. Mater Handl Eng 45(11):70
