delivery of social activities or tasks. Starting from this premise, from the perspective of
social responsibility and territorial governance, the paper attempts to provide a critical
analysis of the manner and limits that public authorities have in managing the
administrative-territorial units, in fulfilling their responsibilities and in ensuring a
sustainable development framework for a proper life. Public authorities are institutional
vehicles for putting into practice the constitutional principles and the international
declarations and standards on sustainable development and quality of life. The specific
areas of the quality of life concern welfare, living standards, income, social inequalities,
environmental protection, housing and neighborhood relations, lifestyle, as well as social
and economic costs (Nae, 2009).
The studies on administrative-territorial structures of Romania cover most frequently the
analysis of the skills of public administration authorities, of the inter-institutional
cooperation in achieving the shared competences, of the effects of decentralization on local
development, of the relation between the different levels of administration (Androniceanu,
2008), and of their organization and dynamics (Săgeată, 2011).
This study analyzes the administrative-territorial units (communes, cities and
municipalities) in terms of the attributes and resources required to perform their
administrative skills concerning teritorial planning and development and the social
responsibilities they have towards community members. According to the current doctrine,
the public administration operates through administrative and legal acts, as well as through
material and technical operations (Trăilescu, 2005). The analysis aims, in the first place, at
clarifying the context of the European national and local authorities in setting out their
responsibilities regarding the local sustainable development and in ensuring high standards
of the quality of life. Secondly, based on the assessment of the resources available to them
and the possible planning and cooperation practices meant to fulfil their responsibilities, it
intends to evaluate their capacity to put them into practice. We should note that although
there are numerous studies that analyze the public administration responsibilities, the
Romanian scientific literature has neither tackled yet the topic of this study nor intended to
correlate the responsibilities of local authorities with the resources at hand.
We emphasize that, without a forced comparison or confusion of terms, in the context of
the standard regarding social responsibility one can make a correlation between the public
institutions and the citizens (end users of the public services and the results of the
sustainable territorial planning), on the one hand, and between organizations and
consumers, on the other hand. In this regard, we mention that public institutions, like any
other organizations that provide products and services to consumers/end users of products
and services, have responsibilities towards them. In accordance with the ISO 26000
standard, the main areas in which the organizations are responsible to the consumers refer
to the following: complete and accurate information; the protection of life, health and safety
of the consumers; sustainable consumption; access to essential services; education and the
raising of consumers’ awareness. The principles outlined above apply to all organizations in
their role of serving the consumers, even if "their areas of work may have a different
relevance depending on the type of organization (such as private organizations, public or
other) and the circumstances ".

1. Social responsibility of the public administration – national and international
context
In order to ensure the implementation of the principles of sustainable development, the
quality of life and the actors’ responsibility, these have been transposed into the regulatory
framework, while the public administration authorities have been designated to play a
coordinating role in their implementation. Administrative-territorial structures are complex
entities with certain institutional stability, but their socio-demographic and economic
components organize themselves, restructure and evolve according to rules similar to
hierarchical organizations. As Barnes (2000, pp.6) outlined, we live in a "system of social
institutions and social relationships wherein individual persons are accountable to others for
what they do or what is done on their authority". The relationship between public
institutions and citizens can evolve in two directions: collectively and individually. This
relationship is dynamic, evolutionary and based on the principles of social responsibility.
The concept of social responsibility, extracted from the social responsibility theory, was
mentioned in the Hutchins Commission report in 1947 as a commitment to social
responsibility in the media. In all areas of social life, the social responsibility theory has
both its supporters and opponents. Seen as an ideological construct or a "sterile intellectual
exercise" (Nerone, 1995), it is still regarded as a normative theory that directs the media
organizations, being often considered "an ideology that legitimizes and rationalizes the
status quo" (Altschull, 1990). Based on the four items in the construction of a responsibility
(Williams, 1993) "cause, intention, state and response", we try to offer an analysis of the
social responsibility of the public authorities on sustainable development and the quality of
life in terms of two main elements: intent / legal powers and status / capacity.
In November 2010, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) passed the ISO
guide 26000 as "voluntary guidelines, not a certification standard" (Altschuller et. al, 2011,
pp. 2), which applies to all public and private sector organizations. The ISO guide 26000
defines Social Responsibility as “The responsibility of an organization for the impacts of its
decisions and activities on society and the environment through transparent and ethical
behavior that contributes to sustainable development, including health and the welfare of
society; takes into account the expectations of stakeholders; is in compliance with
applicable law and consistent with international norms of behavior”. This is a credible and
globally accepted definition, which focuses on the integration of environment features and
social activities of an organization.
The concept of social responsibility, with its version, the corporate social responsibility, is
better known in theory than in practice. The emergence of this standard marks the moment
when the concept of corporate social responsibility (CSR) was converted in social
responsibility (SR), which involves the applying of the concept to the public and private
sector, regardless of the type of organization. As originator and promoter of public policy,
the State, through the competent public authorities, has the responsibility to create
favorable conditions for the development of the concept of social responsibility.
In this respect, the Romanian Government developed on September 14, 2011 the National
Strategy for Promoting Social Responsibility. Thus, the responsibility of public
administration authorities is, on the one hand, to demonstrate openness to dialogue with
social entrepreneurs and social partners, and on the other hand, to create the necessary legal
framework to promote a socially responsible approach in order to prevent the negative
According to the National Strategy for Promoting Social Responsibility, the aim of the
public authorities is to support the development of the conditions for the application of
social responsibilities in companies, “the increased involvement of the public sector, of the
Romanian and multinational companies, and the civil society" (Romanian Government,
201, pp.14). The involvement of public authorities, under the conditions presented in the
strategy, does not replace or affect in any way the responsibility of public authorities to act
in accordance with the public interest, which are responsibilities incumbent upon the public
authorities under the Romanian Constitution. Public institutions aim at serving the public
interest, and from this perspective, they must apply the concept of social responsibility and
act as promoters of social dialogue and cooperation in this area (Romanian Government,
2011, pp.21).
2. Administrative competence, governance and sustainable territorial development
Social responsibility was rather understood within the framework of the concept of
corporate social responsibility, whence its reputation, but also its ambiguities. Social
responsibility was linked in academic studies and public policies with the concept of
sustainable development. The concept of sustainable development was studied by all social
sciences. In geography, for example, the research was based on specific approaches, like
the environmentalist determinism or, more recently, the (neo) environmentalist determinism
(Sluyter, 2003). Geography, as a social science, along with its sub-branches (for instance,
political ecology) had an important role in explaining and interpreting the effects of human
activity on the environment. “Political ecology aims to examine social, political and
environmental processes and to take into account the way in which different scales (the
local, regional, national and global) interrelate” (Watson, 2010, pp.105).
Organizations and companies, in the spirit of the (neo) liberal approach, were not seen as
profit entities, but as organizations that have some moral obligations to society, resulting in
philanthropy. In the context of globalization, many factors have contributed to the
emergence of some forms of voluntary corporate responsibility „the globalization of
corporations and their supply networks, anti-corporate activism, rise in the power of
corporate brands and reputation, increase in public awareness of corporate activity and its
impacts” (Hugh and Wray, 2009, pp.292). The delicate relationships between the anticorporate campaigns and social responsibility on the one hand, and the influence of
investors, on the other hand, have been the favorite topic of radical geography in recent
years (Gouldson, 2006, Oglesby, 2004, Clark and Hebbs, 2005). However, in other
disciplines (economics, business ethics, etc.), the concept of corporate social responsibility
takes different connotations, which insist on human rights and sustainable development.
Given the complexity and effects that sustainable development involves, some authors
(Peyser and Filutowski, 2010:9) advocate the concept of "Business Responsibility"; „it
might then be better to think of CSR as BR, or business responsibility, meaning a set of
best practices and policies, which, if followed, will lead to sustainability”. The complexity
of the relationship between sustainable development and other areas of economic subjects
was (re)discussed by specialists, being considered "both positive and negative" (Dinu,
2010, pp.5). Likewise, many researches that discuss economics interfere with recurring
themes of social responsibility, such as policies and consumer rights (Dinu, et.al, 2010),
standardization and certification of products and services (Dinu, 2006), and their
competitive potential (Dinu, 2008; Dinu and Andrei, 2007). Several studies have
highlighted the importance of business activities from the perspective of sustainable
development in general (Săvoiu, 2013), and the services, in particular (Coca et al., 2013;
Lupu et al., 2013). At the same time, the multiple and complex connections between social
responsibility and bussiness environment, on the one hand, and human resource
sustainability, on the other hand, are debated and called into question (Sitnikov and Bocean,
2013; Čudanov et al., 2012; Cimpoeru, 2012).
It is worth noting that this paper will address the issue of sustainable development only in
terms of the operational capacity of the local authorities to ensure the fulfillment of their
responsibilities towards the customers of the public services, as members of the local
communities. Given their pluridimensionality, the principles of corporate social
responsibility should be linked with the principles of governance or territorial governance.
Territorial governance is often understood as a "process of interaction between the public
sector and the various actors or groups of actors in civil society" (Paproski, 1993), among
them being an "action space". This exercises control or authority through a set of
regulations. It is what Dean (1999, pp. 29-30) broadly understands by urban governance,
valid for the (post) modern society: “specific techniques, mechanisms, procedures and
vocabularies that constitute ruling authority; strategies and rationalities employed in
governmental practices”. Thus, in order to fulfill the above mentioned responsibilities in
conformity with the Romanian Constitution (articles 35 and 47), the State recognizes the
right of every person to a healthy and ecologically balanced environment, ensuring the
legislative framework for exercising that right. At the same time, the state is obliged to take
measures of economic development and social protection, so that to ensure the citizens a
decent living. In order to achieve these goals, the State - through its institutions and within
the legal framework and existing resources - must build and adapt the tools of territorial
public action.
3. Territorial planning and administrative capacity - European principles and
national practices
The UN Guidelines for Consumer Protection (1985) express the principles that should
guide the practices related to the legitimate needs of consumers. These include the basic
needs, the rights to an adequate standard of living and to the continuous improvement of the
living conditions, as well as the availability of products and essential services, including
financial. We should recall that the UN Guidelines for Consumer Protection were expanded
in 1999, so that to include provisions on sustainable consumption. By this document, the
states were required to protect the consumers from the risks to their health and safety, to
promote and protect the economic interests of consumers, enabling them to make informed
choices, to educate consumers and to promote more sustainable consumption patterns. We
should also note that these strategic documents assumed by the signatory states, including
Romania, mention the necessity to promote a fair, equitable and sustainable economic and
social development, and to protect the environment (Dinu, 2006).
Sustainable territorial development is achieved through spatial and urban planning, which
are sets of complex activities of general interest that contribute to a balanced regional
development, the protection of natural and built-up heritage, the improvement of the living

and European level.
Since Spatial Planning (urban and territorial planning) is not a field of acquis
communautaire there is no common EU legislation on these measures. Based on the
principle of subsidiarity, the planning policies and urban development fall within the scope
of the national and local authorities alone, as the European Union has no direct
responsibilities in spatial planning. The European Union has its own or shared powers with
spatial impact, such as environmental policy, as well as structural and regional policies
(cohesion policy, transport networks etc.).
Due to its membership of the Council of the European Union, Romania has assumed and
must implement a number of goals listed in different European spatial planning policy
documents (from the European Charter for Regional Planning, Torremolinos, 1983, to the
Territorial Agenda of the European Union 2020, 2011). Thus, territorial planning is an
activity of interest with continuous character, which is conducted, as appropriate, at the
domestic, interregional, regional or district level.
The objectives of territorial planning are the following: promoting a balanced economic and
social development of regions and areas in accordance with their specific features;
improving the quality of human life and human collectivities; managing responsibly the
natural resources, so that to safeguard environmental and cultural landscapes; a rational
land use etc.
In Romania, the adverse application of the principles of renewal of historic inner-city areas
during the communist period shed negative light on territorial planning in general, which
made this field acquire a bad reputation. Consequently, the restructuring of the national
legislation and the new Romanian Constitution (1991), did not deem it a priority area, and
hence a subject of organic law. These limitations imposed by the hierarchy of normative
acts adversely influence the implementation of the principles of territorial planning. The
most relevant example is the difficulty of imposing stricter rules for the new urban
residential complexes developing on lands newly included in the built-up area. Unlike other
European countries and in contradiction with the provisions of the Romanian interwar
legislation, at present is impossible to set aside some land in order to design quality public
spaces for parks, playgrounds or public institutions (schools, health and social services
etc.). This happens because the settlements keep spreading on new farmland and the
specific legal regulations are absent (Suditu, 2011).
The Law no. 350/2001 on regional and town planning regulates a number of aspects
relating to the management of the national territory, the principles of sustainable
development and the role of local government in these activities. As a general principle, it
is stated that the Romanian territory is part of the national wealth enjoyed by all citizens,
while the public authorities manage and safeguard this wealth, within the limits of the law.
Furthermore, in order to ensure a balanced, coherent and sustainable development of the
national territory, the local authorities harmonize their land use decisions under the
principles of decentralization, local autonomy and devolution of public services. The state,
through the public authorities, has the right and duty to ensure a sustainable development,
through urban and land use planning, and to respect the general interest, according to the
law.

The law of land and urban planning states that the spatial management of the territory aims
at ensuring individuals and communities fair rights and responsibilities for the efficient use
of land. At the same time, it intends to provide adequate living and working conditions and
transport services that meet the diversity of needs and population resources, to foster low
energy consumption, to protect the natural and built-up landscapes, as well as the
architectural and cultural identity of urban and rural areas.
Although in theory, the state assumes and implements the European principles of social
responsibility, in practice, in the context of administrative decentralization and
administrative autonomy of the local authorities, one can note an institutional and
regulatory failure. Even if the state, through its Ministers and other Government
representatives, assumes the principles, these cannot always be put into practice in the
absence of the institutional mechanisms for distributing the assumed legislative
responsibilities between the central and local authorities.
As mentioned previously, the implementation in Romania of the principles of limiting the
wastage of agricultural land and of reducing the uncontrolled urban sprawl highlights the
interests and the limits of the public authorities in carrying their social responsibilities.
Even if Romania is part of the agreement stating that sustainable development also requires
the restriction of uncontrolled urban sprawl, there is no rule or method by which local
authorities can be forced to obey this provision! The reasons are related to the financial
resources these lands provide for the public authorities, as the built-up expansion is a
method for increasing local budgets. Thus, the Law no. 273 of June 29, 2006, on local
public finances, subsequently amended and supplemented, has established the system for
allocating money from the state budget to the local budgets. Thus, in order to balance the
local budgets of the administrative-territorial units, the Government approves certain
amounts of money from the state budget, according to the following criteria: population,
percentage of the built-up area in the administrative-territorial unit, and the financial
capacity of the local government. Based on the analysis performed by the counties’
department of public finance, and after the verification of the financial capacity of the
administrative-territorial units, the first two criteria help determine the budget allocations as
follows: 75% is granted depending on the population of the ATUs, and 25% in accordance
with their share of built-up area. Normally, the extension of the buildable areas is
proportional to the need for land necessary for housing or economic activities. The
expansion of urban perimeters suggests an economic dynamics, which imposes additional
costs on local authorities to equip them. In this sense, in the context of the spatial
development inequalities in Romania, the Government intends to support the local
authorities in the less developed areas; this is done by introducing a coefficient referring to
the built-up area in the formula that balances the local budgets through contributions from
the state budget. However, studies have shown that legislative provisions were used in an
inappropriate manner by the local authorities, which continued to allow the abusive sprawl
of the settlements, so that to get additional amounts of money from the state budget. (Suditu
B., 2012).
We insist in examining these issues, not only because Romania has assumed the European
strategic documents stating that sustainable development requires the limiting of
uncontrolled expansion and fertile farmland savings, but also because these lands have to
be made viable in order to ensure good living conditions. Thus, the responsibility and most
of the viability costs are incumbent upon the local authorities. But locally, the buildable
responsibilities of public authorities, including those of ensuring the sustainable territorial
development and the quality of life of the community members.
4. Territorial disparities in the distribution of public financial resources
The local wealth, translated as various indicators, often suggests the idea of the existence of
quality public services and high living standards. In order to illustrate the disparities in the
distribution of financial resources, and hence the ability of administrative territorial units to
discharge their responsibilities for ensuring a sustainable territorial development and a
quality living environment for the residents, a number of representative indicators regarding
the socio-demographic characteristics and the resources of local communities were
analzyed. .As regards, the analysis of statistical information on local budgets (1999-2012)
presented on the ministry sites, one should note that the annual values of the analzyed
indicators are very close. Nevertheless, our cartographic representation relies on the
indicators for 2009, as the dynamics of this year's budget was less affected by the economic
crisis and political changes that took place in Romania. The map showing the share of local
incomes in the total revenues (Fig. 1) shows some disparities both at the regional level, and
at the level of the living environments (urban and rural areas). These disparities are
determined by a number of factors, among which economic underdevelopment and
unemployment rate play a key role. In this regard, one can see that poorly developed areas
have the smallest income share of the total revenue; such situation is recorded in Moldavia,
in particular in Vaslui County, where in many communes the values of this indicator range
from 0-15%. Similar values, but for fewer administrative units, are recorded in Botoşani,
Iaşi and Vrancea. For the rest of the territory these values appear completely isolated. But
there are also areas having a high economic development potential. These surround the
large cities like Timişoara, Cluj-Napoca, Braşov, Ploieşti, Galaţi and Constanţa, centers that
still polarize much of the active population at regional and even national level. Somewhat
proportional to the potential of their economic development, these urban areas and their
proximate neighborhoods record high values (over 50%) of their income share of the total
revenue. It is the case of the communes lying in the metropolitan area of Cluj-Napoca; the
localities in the metropolitan area of Timişoara; a chain of small towns lying north of
Ploieşti, the economy of which is based on mining and oil processing; and the coastal zone,
together with the adjacent settlements included in the Constanţa – Mangalia urban area.
The rural areas in the south of the country, belonging to the Teleorman, Olt, Dolj, Călarăşi
and Ialomiţa counties, which experience active phenomena related to aging and
depopulation, encompass many settlements with modest share of people’s incomes in the
total revenue (with values less than 30%). The situation is the same for some districts
positioned in the highland areas of Banat, Apuseni Mountains and Petroşani Depression.
With an economy based on ore or coal mining, they thrived under the communist regime,
but now are nearly bankrupt. These economic issues, coupled here and there with aging and
depopulation (Apuseni), show why those communities are on the level of subsistence,
which explains the low share of the people’s incomes in the total revenues.
The cartographic representation of the distribution of the revenues from the state budget
towards the urban and rural areas in Romania reveals a number of differences and regional
disparities. Thus, one can see several nuclei with a small share of revenues from the state

budget (under 50%), which are spread around the areas with economic development higher
than the national average. According to this criterion, Bucharest City and Ilfov County
stand out, followed by Ploieşti – Braşov axis, which follows the Prahova Valley. Other
nuclei with low shares of state budget revenues are found in the western part of the country,
around Timişoara City, and in Transylvania, around Cluj-Napoca (Fig. 2).

Figure no. 1: The map of the share of local incomes in the total revenues (2009)
Source: developed by the authors based on the data of INS and www.dpfbl.mdrap.ro

Figure no. 2: The share of revenue from the state budget in the total local revenue (2009)
Source: developed by the authors based on the data of INS and www.dpfbl.mdrap.ro/

Wallachia and Crişana, in southern Transylvania, southern Dobrudja and the Romanian
Black Sea coast. The presence in these regions of some municipalities, generally county
seats, which to some extent have adapted to the rigors of the market economy, is felt in the
total income, as there is a steady trend in maintaining the balance between the people’s
income and the state budget revenues.
Dramatic is the fact that on this indicator a large part of the country shows high values (over
70%), which puts additional pressure on the state budget. In this category fall most of
Moldavia, Wallachia and Oltenia, as well as Mehedinţi and Caraş-Severin. These regions are
often considered as highly rural, which leads to economic underdevelopment and other
serious social phenomena. The eastern part of Moldavia shows the highest values, many of
the rural settlements belonging to Vaslui and Botoşani counties having shares of incomes
exceeding 80% of the state budget revenues. The situation is the same for more than half of
the rural settlements in the Vrancea and Suceava counties. Similarly, in the south and
southwest of the country most rural settlements show high values of this indicator, which
outline some important core areas in the perimeter of Teleorman and Caraş-Severin counties.
The indicator for 2009 regarding the shares deducted from the income tax relative to the
number of inhabitants in the rural areas shows major differences in terms of its distribution
both at inter-regional and intra-regional level. Thus, some communes in the north of the Ilfov
County (Ciolpani, Snagov, Baloteşti, Tunari etc.) show very high values (over 500). It is also
the case of a number of communes, which form core areas in the vicinity of the big cities:
Girov, Pădureni, Sanandrei and Satchinez – in the vicinity of Timişoara; Apahida, Jucu, Up,
Floresti Savadisla – near Cluj-Napoca; Robăneşti, Cârcea, Podari – in the neighborhood of
Craiova; Bradu, Oarja and Moşoaia - concentrated in the southern part of Piteşti City (Fig. 3).

Figure no. 3: The sums deducted from the income tax rates by number of inhabitants
in rural areas (2009)
Source: developed by the authors based on the data of INS and www.dpfbl.mdrap.ro/
In addition to these groupings lying in the hinterland of the large cities, there are often
communes showing high levels of this indicator in the mountain area, as follows: Siriu
(Buzău), Arefu (Argeş County) Voineasa and Mala (Vâlcea County), Clopotiva (Hunedoara
County), Mehadia (Caraş-Severin County), Răstoliţa and Stânceni (Mures County), Dorna
Cândrenilor (Suceava County), and Oituz (Bacău County). Similarly, in Tulcea County, in
the Danube Delta, the values of this index are high, and even very high in the case of Sfântu
Gheorghe and Pardina communes.
The lowest values of this indicator include the rural areas of Moldavia. Most of the
communes in this area, and especially those lying in the poorest counties (Botoşani, Iaşi,
Vaslui and Galaţi), show frequently low values at this indicator. A similar situation is
recorded in the southern part of Wallachia and Oltenia, the lowest values occurring in the
communes belonging to the Teleroman, Olt and Dolj counties.
The cartographic representation of the indicator regarding the shares deducted from the
income tax relative to the number of inhabitants in the urban environment for the year
2009, has revealed several inter and intra-regional differences. At national level, several
nuclei with high values for this indicator stand out, lying around the urban areas with
economic development higher than the national average, such as Bucharest, Cluj-Napoca,
Timişoara, Iaşi, Bacău, Buzău, Craiova, Râmnicu Vâlcea, Piteşti, and Constanţa. As one
can see, the high values are common for the large cities (with population exceeding 100
000 inhabitants), which are important from the administrative point of view, both at the
level of development region and at the county level (Fig. 4).

Figure no. 4: The sums deducted from the income tax rates by the number of
inhabitants in urban areas (2009)
Source: developed by the authors based on the data of INS and www.dpfbl.mdrap.ro/

and southeast of the country, followed by the western territories and Transylvania. In the
case of Wallachia, one can note high values on the territory of the Ilfov County, as well as
along the axis following the Prahova Valley, between Ploieşti and Braşov. In addition to the
county seats, which record high values at this indicator (Piteşti, Ploieşti, Buzău, Slobozia),
one can also note a number of smaller cities (Piteşti, Băicoi, Urziceni). Dobrudja records
high values for the county seats (Constanţa and Tulcea), as well as for Mangalia. Likewise,
Oltenia has significant values both in the case of the urban centers that are county seats
(Râmnicu Vâlcea, Craiova, Târgu Jiu), and in the case of the Gorj County (Rovinari,
Ţicleni, Turceni).
In the west of the country, the high values of this indicator are also specific for the county
seats - Timişoara, Arad, Oradea and Satu Mare, while the rest of the urban settlements are
predominantly characterized by mean values (less than 1000). It is the case of Lugoj,
Jimbolia, Deta (Timiş County), Nădlac, Chişinău-Criş, Ineu, Sebiş (Arad County), Vaşcău,
Beiuş, Aleşd (Bihor County), Carei and Seini (Satu Mare County). The situation is similar
in Transylvania, where municipalities and county seats record the highest rates, while the
other cities like Turda, Câmpia Turzii, Gherla, Dej (Cluj County), Năsăud, Beclean (Bistriţa
County), Aiud, Blaj (Alba), Sighişoara and Reghin (Mureş), have average values.
In Moldavia, the cities with small and medium population in the Botoşani, Iaşi and Galaţi
counties generally have low values (mostly below 500). The average shares are recorded by
some cities in the Suceava County (Rădăuţi, Câmpulung Moldovenesc, Vatra Dornei),
Neamţ County (Târgu Neamţ, Roman), Bacău County (Moineşti, Târgu Ocna, Oneşti) and
Vrancea County (Adjud).
5. Forms of territorial cooperation necessary to fulfill social responsibilities for the
users of public services
The diversity of the distribution of financial resources should be analyzed in correlation
with the specific features of the settlements. The results of the 2011 population and housing
census revealed the demographic diversity of the administrative-territorial units (ATU) of
Romania. Thus, of the 3181 ATU - including 320 cities and towns, and 2861 communes -,
1176 ATU (i.e. 36.96% of the total number of ATU) had a population less than 2500
inhabitants. Moreover, 88 ATU (2.76%) had a population of less than 1000 inhabitants, of
which 12 ATU had less than 500 people (National Institute of Statistics, 2013).
As far as the socio-demographic characteristics are concerned, recent studies indicate that
the number of administrative-territorial units in Romania in which the share of young
people was very low (below 10% of the total population) increased from 25 (representing
0.85% of the total villages, towns and municipalities) in 1995 to 60 (1.89% of the total) in
2010. In 1995, the proportion of the young people was above a quarter of the total
population in 38 ATU (1.29% of the total number of ATU), while in 2010 it dropped to 14
(0.44% of the total). Geodemographic analyses confirm the general trend of demographic
aging in some areas of Romania, inasmuch as the number of administrative-territorial units
in which the share of the elders in the total population exceeds 30% increased from 67
(2.27% of the total number of communes, cities and municipalities) in 1995 to 216 (6.79%
of the total) in 2010. In this context, the decrease in the number of administrative-territorial
units in which the share of population over 65 years is less than 10% of the total population
becomes relevant: a drop from 357 ATU (12.1% of the total) in 1995 to 115 (3.62% of the
total) in 2010. At the same time, due to the changes of the share of the age groups in the
population structure of Romania, cartographic representations of demographic dependency
highlight the worsening of the demographic problems in specific areas, especially rural.
Thus, one can note an increase in territorial demographic dependency between the two
moments of the analysis, but also a demographic specialization of the country, which
highlights the isolation and the decline of the population of the rural areas of Moldavia
(Botoşani and Vaslui counties), central eastern areas (Buzău, Brăila and Ialomiţa counties),
southwestern Wallachia (Teleorman County), southwestern Oltenia (Dolj and Mehedinţi
counties) and northeastern Transylvania (Cluj and Sălaj counties) (Ministry of Regional
Development and Tourism, 2011) .
Statistical information confirms the great demographic diversity and the fragmentation of
administrative-territorial units in Romania. Likewise, the analysis shows that regardless of
the size and the available financial and human resources, in the context of local autonomy
the public authorities have the same social responsibilities to the community. And the
statement of the principle of local autonomy, according to the Law on local public
administration no. 215/2001 republished, which broadly borrows the definition in the
European Charter of Local Self-Government adopted in Strasbourg in 1985, points out that
"Local autonomy means the right and the effective capacity of local authorities to address
and manage, on behalf and in the interest of the local communities they represent, the
public affairs, under the law" (Apostol, 2008, pp.259). The limited human and financial
resources available to the public administration units do not exempt them from fulfilling
their responsibilities, but require the adaptation of the practices and administrative
cooperation according to the socio-demographic and economic characteristics of the
administrative-territorial units, so that to fulfill their legal duties.
In order to support cooperation between the administrative-territorial units for the
fulfillment of their responsibilities, the Law on local public administration established the
legal partnership mechanisms. Thus, according to the law, two or more administrativeterritorial units have the right, within the limits of their deliberative and executive powers,
to associate and cooperate by establishing intercommunity development associations, with
legal personality, of private law and public utility. It is worth mentioning that the
association is voluntary and does not diminish the autonomy of the public authorities
involved. Moreover, it leads to reduced administrative costs, gives consistency to the joint
administrative practices and improves them continuously.
The forms of association and cooperation can be: a) Metropolitan areas - intercommunity
development associations established based on the partnership between Bucharest - the
capital of Romania - or the first rank cities (with population over 200 thousand inhabitants)
and the administrative-territorial units lying nearby; b) Urban agglomerations intercommunity development associations formed on the basis of a partnership between
municipalities and cities (with population less than 200thousand inhabitants), including also
the urban and rural areas in their hinterland; c) Intercommunity development structures cooperation structures with legal personality, set up by the administrative-territorial units
for the joint development of regional or local interest projects or for the joint provision of
public services.
The European cooperation practices between the administrative-territorial units offered the
setting for the capitalization of their economic potential and for ensuring territorial equity.
the institutions and the public administration authorities have the responsibility for
identifying and implementing solutions for ensuring optimal living conditions, better
exploitation of resources and sustainable development of all regions.
Conclusions
Based on the specialty literature, on the European strategic territorial planning documents,
on the national legislation regarding the public administration responsibilities for the
development and territorial cooperation, as well as on the analysis of statistical information
on the socio-demographic and budgetary resources of the administrative-territorial units in
Romania, we have highlighted the institutional principles and mechanisms that govern the
actions of public institutions to ensure a decent life and a sustainable territorial
development. In this regard, in accordance with international standards and constitutional
principles, the actions of the public institutions for the support and in the interest of local
communities must rely on social responsibility principles. However, although the public
institutions’ responsibilities are highlighted by the standard ISO 26000, which stipulates
that the State should satisfy the basic needs of the population (health care, the right to
services related to utilities such as electricity gas, water, sewage disposal, drainage,
sewerage and telephone), within the context of its available resources the State does not
guarantee that these rights are protected everywhere.
In order to mitigate the economic disparities between the different areas or regions of the
country, to capitalize the existing human and economic resources and to ensure territorial
equity, the authorities need to adapt and tailor their public policies and measures according
to local feaures. "The relationship between national and urban governance entails many of
the debates about decentralization. These debates focus on the administrative and political
dimensions of devolving power to individuals and groups in civil society" (Harpham and
Boateng, 1997, p.68). The practices of corporate social responsibility and public
intervention may support each other and involve "mutual supportiveness" (De Schutter,
2008, p.15). However, non-intervention or the uniform application of public policies in the
context of socio-demographic and territorial diversity will not allow the successful
achievement of the objectives of sustainable development and the improving of the living
conditions of the citizens. More often than not, public action limits are imposed by the scant
budgetary resources. In this respect, we consider that the development of intercommunity
cooperation and the sharing of professional human resources are solutions by which the
planning and sustainable development objectives can be met. Attracting financial resources
from the state budget by extending the built-up areas is an unsustainable practice, which
will lead, on medium and long term, to increased expenditures in order to provide the basic
needs of the community members, end users of the public services.
This study presents the regional disparities from the point of view of the budgetary
resources available to the public authorities, while taking also into account the institutional
framework under which authorities can cooperate to carry out their responsibilities. Within
the context of extending the measures of administrative decentralization, the study findings
open the prospect of detailed analyses of the way in which community development
associations or metropolitan areas and urban agglomerations work. At the same time, they
can show the effects of sharing the competences and the professional human resources in

the field of sustainable territorial planning and development. At the same time, they allow
the assessment of costs and the extent to which the responsibilities of administrative
territorial units are fulfilled. It is worth mentioning that the results can support the
assessment of the financial and economic viability of administrative-territorial units, within
the context of the emergence of the regulations regarding insolvency and the appearance of
the first case of insolvency, namely the Aninoasa town (Hunedoara County).
We therefore consider that in order to ensure decent living conditions and an effective and
sustainable management of the territory, the public institutions should assume the social
responsibility principles and diversify their intervention tools in order to achieve their
objectives.

