The recent major changes regarding the accelerated demographic, technological and
industrial development have enhanced the effects of human activity on the environment.
They occurred at a global scale, recently entering the category of major threats faced by the
planet: climate change, the consistent reduction of the ozone layer, the stressed degradation
of the natural environment, the increase of pollution, the reduction of resources, the growth
in terms of consumption of raw materials, the increase in products that are dumped etc.
(Costanza et al., 2015; Dabija et al., 2018).
The identification of certain solutions, measures and strategies for managing and solving
efficiently the global challenges derived from the necessity to preserve and protect the natural
environment became a key priority for international bodies and regional authorities, both for
governments and organisations. They are making more intense and conjugate efforts for
counterbalancing the negative effects of all threats to the planet. In a holistic approach, the UN
defined since 1987 the sustainable development concept (WCED, 1987), which approaches the
principles and contribution of any type of organization in protecting nature and in identifying
some preventive solutions allowing to anticipate problems, risks and accidents regarding
intense resource consumption, polluting the environment and protecting it.
The implementation of the sustainable development principles by organisations must be carried
out for all activities and processes adopted by them: supply, production, information, research,
development, distribution, maintaining contact with suppliers and customers etc (Pistol and
Țoniș, 2017). An important concern is directed towards the human capital and its development,
seen as a strategic resource in terms of a sustainable growth of economic agents (Iatagan, 2015).
The substantial change in the production processes in order to diminish resource and raw
material consumption, namely the development of environmental-friendly benefits, including
the current technological developments, as well as intellectual capital, represent the basis for
developing and implementing sustainable marketing strategies (Dabija and Pop, 2013; Dabija
and Băbuț, 2013). The design of the new ecologic and/ or environmental-friendly benefits,
based on the sustainable development processes enter more and more in the task of the
marketing area which had a substantial contribution in developing the product concept. The
integration of the defining features and elements of sustainability in the marketing thinking
allowed the development of a market for “green”, sustainable products. At the same time
with the development of a market for ecologic benefits, organisations passed also to generate
a favourable mentality among consumers, highlighting their health benefits, as well as the
contribution of individuals for preserving the environment and for diminishing the
consumption of resources (Pop and Dabija, 2013; Dabija et al., 2018).
Currently, any organisation aiming the improvement of market positioning, must apply
consistently the sustainable development principles within their market approach strategy,
especially the ones regarding environment protection, thus developing and strengthening
competitive advantages. The successful implementation of such an approach is, of course, a
real challenge for marketers, the success being conditioned by the type of business managed
on the targeted market and its dynamics, the strength of the competitors, and the ability of
the organization to adapt to a turbulent environment.

1. The evolution of the green marketing concept
A first reference to the ecologic or “green” marketing dates back to the year 1976, when it
was considered to include all the activities of an organisation that lead to promoting the cause
of environment issues and to providing some viable solutions for counteract, prevent or
eliminate them. From this point of view, marketing outstands by its social component used
for implementing environmental governance (Dangelico and Vocalelli, 2017; Dabija et al.,
2017). Over time, the concept got crystallised and enriched, later on being defined as the
process for planning, implementing and controlling the development, distribution and for
promoting the benefits of organisations, establishing their prices, so as to integrate, as a
synergy, customers needs satisfaction, the fulfilment of the goals of the organisations, i.e.
ensuring the compatibility of the processes with the existing ecosystems (Fuller, 1999).
The literature dedicated to green marketing and its forms of manifestation (“green”
communication, ecologic consumers, environmental friendly benefits, a mentality favouring
ecologic products, environmental governance, recycling behaviour etc.) shows the fact that
it must be able, at the same time, to develop high quality benefits, environmental friendly and
according to the expectancies of the consumers (Peattie, 2001; Ottman et al., 2006; Radnovic
et al., 2012; Dabija and Pop, 2013; Kumar et al., 2013; Pop and Dabija, 2013; Ratcliffe and
Coutler, 2015; Papadas et al., 2017). In implementing the green marketing principles,
organisations focus more and more frequently on the clean technology development, oriented
towards reducing the consumption of resources and on protecting the environment. They
must be used so that they might generate competitive advantages (Peattie, 2001).
In the knowledge society, green marketing is facing new and diverse challenges derived from
the technological evolution and the need of the organisations to identify viable strategies,
able to keep generating a competitive advantage by including the results of technological
progress and innovations in all their production processes.
Intelligent growth means integrating innovations in the economy, improving education and
the performance of research and promoting a viable knowledge transfer (Ciucă et al., 2016).
In fact, nowadays, green marketing is responsible for fostering economic processes as a result
of facilitating access for various information, issued by the competition, customers, namely
the market environment. Based on the information obtained via the sustainable, ecologic
strategies for processing the markets, organisations must take specific measures meant to stop
the deterioration of the environment, improve the quality of life for customers, but also to
sustainably preserved resources (Papadas et al., 2017). The ability of green marketing to
contribute to the generation of safe benefits along with the amelioration respectively
improvement of intra-firm processes by reducing their impact on the environment is
somehow guaranteed by the intrinsic essence of the concept and its social dimension. Socially
speaking, green marketing aims at changing the behaviour of economic agents in order to
make the entire human activity compatible with the existing ecosystems. Therewith, frequent
changes in the market environment favour the development and implementation of new
marketing strategies to help achieve sustainable eco-innovation. Consequently, green
marketing becomes a fundamental component in the successful implementation of the
marketing mix and the strategies and policies required for environmental governance.
The recent developments of the market environment favour more intensely the identification
of viable solutions for including IT&C with green marketing and the strategies developed
based on its principles. IT&C lead to the appearance of big data collections, whose proper
analysis and interpretation can contribute to improving the organization's activities, better
of the internal and external parameters depending on which strategies are usually developed
(Pistol et al., 2016).
2. The advantages of implementing the green marketing specific principles
The organisations implementing sustainable strategies sent thereof a strong message to the
stakeholders regarding the capacity to acknowledge the risks and challenges of the business
environment, but also to adapt to the changes of the market environment. Basically, these
organisations, by their activities and the implemented strategies, are aligned to certain social
needs, transposing “green” marketing in all their internal processes (Lash and Wellington,
2011). The enforcement of the “green” marketing principles is done at the level of all the
components of the mix, developing competitive advantages by differentiating the benefits
and by the targeted organisational culture (Kotler, 2011).
The potential of green marketing to provide an essential contribution, namely added value to
developing sustainable strategies, is obvious, recent studies (Fuentes, 2015) showing that
most of the times its effective implementation can prove to be a real challenge for marketers
because consumers do not always perceive the virtues and the relevance of ecologic benefits
or of the green marketing-based sustainable strategies to them. For instance, the most
frequently sold products apart from ecologic food, gaining more and more importance in
Romania, too (Pop and Dabija, 2013), are represented by the energy saving systems, i.e. nonfood “green” products (Makower, 2011), indicating the need that for the future, marketers
should explain better such phenomena.
By consuming ecologic products, consumers can obtain some obvious benefits, such as: a
favourable price/ added value ratio; health and safety; performance; status and symbolism;
comfort and utility. Marketers must make constant efforts for promoting and educating them
(e.g. price reductions) and in highlighting the intrinsic benefits from consuming them
(Ottman et al., 2006; Radnovic, 2012).
Applying green marketing in organisations pursuing a sustainable strategy requires following
some specific principles constantly, among which the ones of circular economy (a raw material
turns into a consumption good, which, after being used by the customer, becomes recyclable
waste); ensuring the ecologic balance of the marketing strategy; preventing pollution and the
contribution of the organisation to regenerating nature, i.e. designing the business strategies so
that they might allow the protection of the ecosystems (Alexandru et al, 2015).
The current evolution of the Romanian economy justifies the existence of more clear
concerns about the application of green marketing within companies. They start to be aware
of the importance of communicating such concerns also due to the impact they can have on
customers, investors and other stakeholders. The sustainability culture allows organisations
to obtain better results regarding the efficient use of resources, along with obtaining better
customer satisfaction by resorting to the principles of sustainability (Mauri and Baicu, 2009).
This approach creates a proper framework for applying green marketing, thus organisations
managing to be more successful in the business environment. In the context of analysing
some good practices on applying green marketing it is important to highlight the danger of
the marketing myopia phenomenon.
Marketing myopia, postulated by Levitt (1975), which aims to explain a narrow business vision
implemented by organizations, is gaining importance in the case of companies that do not

manage to understand the relevance of resorting to a sustainable business strategy and to
ecologic, sustainable benefits. The market success of “green” products needs developing a
favourable mentality among customers, their appropriate positioning on the market by
highlighting the benefits of these products for maintaining or even improving the health of the
consumers, as well as promoting them intensely (Pop and Dabija, 2013; Dabija et al., 2018).
The principles that ensure companies to avoid marketing myopia in implementing green
marketing take into account at least, the following elements (Ottman et al., 2006):
 conceiving and developing ecologic benefits with superior features, respectively
improved versus the conventional versions existing on the market; (compared to the
conventional variants existing on the market);
 promoting and presenting the features and the added value of the ecologic benefits
among the representative market segments and adapting them to the individuals’ needs,
expectancies and preferences;
 educating consumers by means of appropriate marketing messages and by highlighting
the intrinsic advantages of the ecologic benefits, such as “no pesticides”; “healthier”;
“efficient”; “supporting financial savings”; “natural”; “adapted to human consumption”;
“protecting nature” etc.;
 highlighting the fact that ecologic benefits are the most suitable “solutions” for
“green” consumption, being aware of the need to protect the environment;
 creating some interesting, inciting and educating webpages about the consumers’
expected value of the ecologic benefits;
 obtaining “green” recommendations and certifications representative for the ecologic
benefits, issued by acknowledged authorities in the field and educating consumers to search
for and recognize these marks.
Large companies in the market, which got involved in developing green marketing, use a
series of successful practices regarding the creation of a quality commitment from the
consumers. These take into account different actions developed in a structured, coherent
manner, as shown in figure no. 1 (Ratclife and Coutler, 2015).
Show me
(Don’t tell me)
Demonstrate actions and an
organisational commitment
suitable for sustainability, that
allow customers to adopt a
worthy to be followed model
Establishing some suitable
practices for social responsibility
in generating credibility and
obtaining leadership

Get me involved

Teach me

Increase the information level of
the consumers about the features
of sustainable products;
Explain clearly the
sustainability strategies of the
company and presenting them to
the consumers

Participate in cooperation with
the consumers in sustaining the
sustainability efforts
Build, refine and develop
sustainable platforms with the
help of the input from the
consumers
Facilitate sustainable actions
implemented with the help of the
consumers

Figure no. 1: Good practices strategies for involving consumers
in ensuring the sustainability of organisations
Source: Ratclife and Coutler, 2015, p.3

levels: green marketing strategic orientation, tactical, respectively the internal one (Papadas
et al., 2017). The green marketing strategic orientation refers to the long-term management
actions and policies, which concentrate mainly on implementing an appropriate environment
governance. The tactical green marketing orientation implies short-term actions which
transform the classical marketing mix into a specific ecologic strategy and benefits specific
one. The internal green marketing orientation implies disseminating the environment values
throughout the organisation in order to incorporate a large ecologic corporate culture.
3. Using “big data” collections in the green marketing strategy
A successful application of the “green” marketing principles in the activity of the
organisations aims at incorporating the newest and most cutting edge marketing information
and data into the implemented strategies. “Big data” present on the market represent a subject
largely debated during the last years, resulting from the unprecedented progress in IT&C.
Even if, intensely debated in the literature, most organisation managers do not always
understand the relevance of this concept and, moreover, they use these data only in a limited
way in marketing decision-making, in drafting the benefits strategies, namely in properly
understanding the signals transmitted by the competition and customers (Verhoef et al., 2016;
Power, 2014). The benefits of using these data properly are tremendous, contributing to gain
competitive advantages.
Through the incorporated technological progress, big data trigger both the utopic and the
dystopian rhetoric. Big data are considered a real tool for approaching different social
problems, providing the potential of some new perspectives in wide fields: research on global
scourge, terrorism and climate change. On the other hand, they are considered as a potential
threat to individual privacy, reducing or even restraining civil freedom and increasing the
relevance of the control exerted on the freedom of speech. The possible interpretation of these
data show varied and subtle changes for the on-going activities (Sivarajah et al., 2017). Big
data represent huge volumes of information which are difficult to be managed with the usual
processing tools and techniques (Hampton et al., 2013). Such batches of data require a special
hardware and software infrastructure for identifying, acquiring, managing and processing
them in an acceptable timeframe (Chen et al., 2014; Şerban et al., 2015). They cannot be
always stored for later, being analysed, processed in real time, allowing companies to adapt
on the go to the environment changes and requirements, namely the preferences of the
customers (McAfee and Brynjolfsson, 2012).
Often, big data are composed of different types of information which are complex and
heterogeneous, structured, semi-structured and even unstructured. Among them, there are the
tabular and relational databases (structured accordingly), data deposits, text data, webpages,
and images in various formats, audio, video etc. (Wu et al., 2014; Ştefan, 2016). Big data can
contain duplicate information, which are not always exact or even contradictory. Big data
can have more sources, one of the most known being social networks, images, sensor
networks and the Internet as a whole. Currently, there are more data uploaded on the internet
every second than they were stored across the entire internet 25 years ago (McAfee and
Brynjolfsson, 2012).

The features that differentiate big data from the common ones are explained via the 4V model
(velocity, volume, veracity, variety) (Grover et al., 2018):
 velocity: represents the essential feature contributing to obtaining and generating
them, but also for their availability period;
 volume: the massive data quantity represents information which can hardly be
managed with traditional processing tools, the important data requiring their collection,
storage and processing them with special hardware-software infrastructure;
 veracity: refers to the problem generated by their ownership, credibility and accuracy;
that is why, if the common analysis tools are used for big data, the results might be wrong;
 variety: refers to the multitude of data types that can be met.
To those 4Vs, a fifth can be added: „value”. Big data contain valuable models and knowledge,
which can be extracted using some appropriate exploitation techniques, providing
opportunities to the organisations that can access and exploit them efficiently (Deepak and
Sultana, 2015; Al-Fuqaha et al., 2015).
The potential offered by big data in following a sustainable business strategy represent a
controversial issue in the literature, using a system able to manage big data requires the use
of more resources which generate challenges for the organisations in obtaining a certain
efficiency of the sustainability of their activity. Managers who are managing their
organisations according to the green marketing principles must identify the best ways to be
followed based on the decisions made. However, their substantiation can become problematic
or even questionable in this context, the major challenge depending on how large data
volumes are being approached and the possibilities for extracting useful and relevant
knowledge. In a constantly changing business environment, organisations which incorporate
the green marketing principles in their business philosophy must understand the fact that the
data volume to be processed is growing exponentially. It requires creating specialised IT
department, able to process large information volumes and to transform them into relevant
business information, able to generate valuable ideas for the company. The expenditure for
research-development activities addressing ecologic technologies have became a priority in
the economic simulation packages used by them (Zaman and Gherasim, 2010).
Using big data in correlation with the analysis of the environment, namely according to the green
marketing philosophy is still at an early stage. The available data regarding the environmental
activities of the organisations usually can be acquired at high costs, by remote observations and
with the help of sensor networks (Jones et al., 2006). However, there are rather small companies
in terms of their activity impact, that have their own data collections regarding the environment,
and which can have the potential to be integrated as large data batches (Hampton et al., 2013).
Unfortunately, these organisations are rarely disposed to provide these data to others in order to
use in making relevant decisions at sector level. Specialists estimate that many of the available
data on the environment are lost and that cooperation projects are abandoned even before they
are starting (Baumann et al., 2016; Song et al., 2018).
Big data, along with other innovative technologies are known as mechanisms created by the
companies to reduce their negative impact on the environment, since they lay the grounds for
developing eco-innovation strategies. In this context, green marketing is considered as one of the
four dimensions of ecologic innovation, along with the ecologic product development, the

time more tendencies were discovered that imply using large data sets for the marketing
decisions and strategies in organisations (Roberts et al., 2014). Using them in enterprises can
have a positive effect on preserving and protecting the environment (Wu, 2017). Using big data
and predictive analysis techniques has a significant impact on the social and environmental
performance of the companies. In a research on 205 companies in India, the authors highlighted
the potential of using big data and predictive analysis in growing the sustainability degree of the
activity of the companies in the new supply chains (Dubey et al., 2017).
A special field proving the capacity of big data to have a major input in implementing the
green marketing principles is represented by sustainable production. This assumes, according
to the US Department of Commerce: “creating manufactured products using processes that
minimize the negative impact on the environment, preserves energy and natural resources
and are safe for the employees, communities and consumers, being also healthy economically
speaking” (International Trade Administration, 2007). Integration of environmental
requirements across the product lifecycle requires a new way of thinking and new decisional
instruments, so that, in fact sustainable production will suppose an ecologic product design,
ecologic provisioning, involvement of ecologic production processes and ecologic
technologies – in other words applying green marketing at a large scale. In order to implement
sustainable production and to have improved performance, each economic agent must excel
in the three areas specific to the performance and sustainability of the activity: economic,
environmental and social.
This requires using large data volumes, namely acquiring, storing and using big data for
decision-making related to the supply chain and the objectives of the strategy (Dubey et al.,
2016). Sustainable production implies integrating successfully more elements, as shown in
figure no. 2.
Management

Regulatory
pressures

Economic
environment

Suppliers’ relationship
management

Employees
involvement

Total quality
management

Sustainable production
Social
environment

The
environment

Productive
support

Customer
relationship

Total productive
maintenance

Figure no. 2: Elements of the reference framework for sustainable production
Source: apud Dubey et al., 2016, p.636.

In order for the real potential of big data to be highlighted, there is a need for support and
commitment at the level of the top management.
Only in this context decision makers can acquire adequate analytical capabilities for big data
management. Organizational culture characterized by flexibility and adaptability is also
essential to ensure the conditions of big data use and integration into a business strategy
specific to green marketing. Future trends indicate the appetite of organizations that are
developing green marketing implementation for more and more creative use of tools such as
big data, tools that currently offer possibilities yet only inherent to manage an appropriate
flow of decision-making in order to increase sustainability.

Conclusions
The principles of green marketing aim at developing and promoting sustainable consumption
irrespective of the type of the benefits considered. Individuals who consume sustainably
modify substantially their specific life style and behaviours, the way of being informed and
processing information, as well as the way to transfer to third parties their consumption
experiences, values, beliefs, attitudes, perceptions and motivations. Sustainable marketing
will control the entire value chain addressed to the consumer, promoting business models
which eliminate waste and optimize resources transformation. Through its implementation,
economic organisations strengthen their institutional image in capitalizing on some attributes
that resonate with social responsibility and economic sustainability. Companies adopting the
green marketing-specific principles become more credible also in dealing with the public
entities in charge with the implementation of the environmental policies, NGOs or
representatives of different communities active in managing global environmental problems
or in promoting a sustainable resource consumption.
The companies that are willing to have competitive advantages based on increased
sustainability related to the environment have greater chances of succeeding in differentiating
from competition. As the market evolves and the consumer develops an optic according to
such values, companies will have to adapt and to incorporate in their own business strategies
the sustainable model according to the green marketing principles. Good practices in this
field are closely correlated with the widespread use of new technologies such as big data.
They suppose changing the managerial optic of the enterprises, integrating the sustainability
principles in the marketing mix, educating consumers towards a healthy lifestyle and a
stronger involvement in communicating on social channels the newly adopted values. Social
responsibility, anchored in the important realities for the Romanian consumer, will become
an excellence standard which can ensure for each economic agent an appropriate positioning
on the market and the premises for an optimal future evolution.

