Jiroveanu, 2009). In other situations, small medium enterprises managers, of companies
which develop export activities, choose to cooperate with larger organizations in order to
gain access to their strong regional and international commercial networks. Similar
problems have the large Romanian enterprises. Once the market conditions have changed
radically, these companies were no longer able to retool and modernize themselves properly
(Dobrescu, 2009). For many of these enterprises, reorganization was no longer a feasible
option, and in several cases, led to the segmentation of technological flows and to a decline
in the competitiveness of their goods and services.
1. The impact of global crisis on the Romanian business environment
Several years after the beginning of the crisis, the Romanian society started to feel its
weight, and some important economic, political, social and administrative changes started
taking place. Although our country has by comparison with the other Eastern European
countries some important advantages such as: highly qualified and low-waged labour force
(Androniceanu, 2011; Popescu, Corboş, 2009), the impact of the economic crisis upon the
economic and social environment has been strong enough.
In recent years foreign investments started having a bigger importance in the Romania’s
economic upswing, as a way to minimize the effects of the global crisis. Nevertheless,
foreign investments in Romania have diminished a lot in the first years of crisis. With the
beginning of the second half of 2011 we can observe a slightly small upswing, which, as
statistical data shows, continues in the first trimester of 2012. The analyses made by
specialists demonstrate that, although the Romanian business environment waits for an
important foreign capital infusion, in reality we can observe that our country's fiscal and
financial policies are not attractive enough to determine a rise in the amount of foreign
investments (Miron, Dima, 2009).
Another important aspect, often mentioned by the representatives of foreign investors in
Romania is the political instability. This generates both discontinuity and insufficient
consistency in economic policies and frequent changes in fiscal policies and in business
environment's particular legislation. This way the investors cannot have continuity in
implementing their own business plans.
The global crisis determined the Romanian enterprises management to make some major
changes in the way they handle their businesses. The enterprises are frequently constrained
to concentrate, firstly, on knowing the market and the customer’s requests (Olaru, Dinu,
2011) and, only secondly, on the production process. Important changes are made in the
decision-making process too, because managers take tactical and strategic decisions which
integrate a diversity of variables: economic, cultural, social, environmental protection.
(Dinu, 2011)
The crisis context has imposed a change to Romanian enterprise managers, mainly in
business strategies and in their management style, in an environment marked by numerous
challenges and a variety of risks (Pugna, Albescu, Băbeanu, 2009). A part of them
succeeded to adapt and to develop their businesses both in Romania and abroad. Others
continue to be preoccupied by valorizing some opportunities to cooperate with large
multinational companies, which already have businesses in Romania and want to expand or
with large companies which plan to enter the Romanian market (Ciocoiu, 2011; Ene, 2005).
pages. Starting with 1961 the term can be found in a Webster dictionary. Two decades later,
the economists used this term to describe contemporary evolutions. Professor Thomas
Levitt had an important role in the integration of this term in economic analyses, by
publishing in 1983, the article "Globalization of Markets". He explained the content of this
term by technological and behavioral changes, which allow multinational companies as
Coca Cola or McDonald's to merchandise the same type of products all over the world.
The globalization facilitated the spread of the crisis effects, beyond national borders, where
the states exert their right to govern.
The globalization determines a succession of changes, which despite of the fact that take
place in one part of the globe, generates chain positive and negative effects, in other parts
of the globe.
In the opinion of Joseph E. Stiglitz, winner of the Nobel Prize in economics, "globalization
determines the acceleration of international circulation of ideas and information, common
cultural actions and stimulates the creation and development of a global civil society. The
biggest hope about globalization is that it will help the growth of the global standard of
living." (Stiglitz, 2008)
For Giddens Anthony, globalization is "a phenomena characterized by fundamental
changes in the global economy, a revolution of communications and trading, information
and currency which takes place between nation states." (Giddens, 2004)
Another opinion regarding globalization has Leslie Sklair. He thinks that "globalization
should be seen as a new face of capitalism, which transcends the unity of the nation state".
(Sklair, 2002)
A vaster approach over the content of globalization has been proposed by American
specialists Held and McGrew. They think that globalization is “an aggregate of processes,
which represents a transformation in the spatial organization of social relations and
transactions, which generates transcontinental and interregional activity flows, interaction
and power". (Held, McGrew, 2003). From their point of view, the globalization process
includes four types of change:
 The expansion of social, political and economic activities across borders, regions and
continents
 The acceleration of cooperation in economic, commercial activities, in the field of
investments, and other fields as: financial, migration, culture, etc.
 The acceleration of global interactions and processes with impact over the
development of transportation and telecommunication systems, which increased the speed
in circulation of information, ideas, goods and capital;
 The expansion and diversification of activities, the intensification of interdependence
and the acceleration of human and organizational interactions. Today, the effects of some
events that take place in one part of the planet generate changes with great impact in some
other part, sometimes it might happen that particular local events to have considerable
global consequences.

In context of intensification of the global crisis, Romanian small and medium enterprises
need a substantial support, both from the associative structures of the business environment
and from national institutions (Androniceanu, 2011; Ciocoiu, 2011; Colesca, 2005). The
entrepreneurial spirit has to be encouraged, and small entrepreneurs have to be supported
with necessary financial resources and with attractive fiscal policies. The globalization has
intensified competitiveness on all possible markets. This is why, presently, not only
companies are competitors, but also nations and regions, through their capacity of
providing goods and services (Abăluţă, 2006; Hâncu, 2011).
Starting from these general considerations, we realized a research in which we discovered
the changes determined by globalization over a group of small and medium enterprises
from Bucharest, specialized in external trade activities. The results of specialists' research
(Miron, Dima, 2009) confirm the fact that the most dynamic component of the Romanian
business environment are the small and medium enterprises and they had a quite interesting
evolution, since the beginning of the recession. The study of the changes that take place in
small and medium enterprises with external trade activity, is an interesting challenge for
research field in Romania and helps us to know and to understand better why the global
crisis affected us strongly in recent years, how did others succeed to redress themselves and
to look with trust and optimism towards the future.
2. Research methodology and the main results
The period of the research process was 1-30 September, 2011 and consisted in four main
steps: 1) research preparation; 2) data collection with particular research instruments; 3) the
analysis and systematization of the results; 4) developing conclusions. An additional step,
for adding details and completing the data base required in clarifying some of the studied
aspects, was realized in March 2012.
2.1. The purpose, the objectives and research hypotheses
The purpose of this research is to know the impact of the global crisis on small and medium
enterprises from Bucharest, which are specialized in the export of goods and services.
The specific objectives of the research are:
 knowing the organizational changes;
 identifying the causes and the effects of some problems that the enterprises and their
managers face since the beginning of the global crisis;
 knowing the opinion of the business people from the target group regarding the anticrisis measures initiated by the Romanian Government and their effects;
 identifying the perception of general managers regarding the future.
The research hypotheses are:
 As a result of the globalization of economic crisis, in the target group enterprises
took place numerous and different changes;

targeted enterprises to initiate tactical and strategic changes.
 The development perspectives of the target group enterprises and, in a larger sense,
of the Romanian small and medium enterprises, are not clear.
2.2. Choosing the sample group
The sample group is formed by small and medium enterprises with legal personality,
headquarters in Bucharest, specialized in exporting goods and services. Their activity fields
are:
 information and communication technology;
 fabric and soft goods;
 machines and electrical gears.
According to the data base of Romanian National Council of Private Small and Medium
Enterprises, only 20% of the total number of small and medium enterprises from our
country, are exporting. The National Statistic Institute has communicated that, in 2011,
Romanian exports had an amount of 41.74 billions of Euros, with an increase of 22.5%
from 2010.
For identifying the small and medium enterprises with export activities from Bucharest, we
have used Infocompanies Software platform, and for establishing the size of the sample
group, we have used the following formula:
(1)
Where:
n – The size of the sample group;
N – The total number of population;
d - The precision level (in this case is 3%, percent established through reference to the total
number of population from which the sample group has been chosen)
Z – 1.96 corresponding to the trust level of 95%
(2)
As it can be noticed, the sample group has 26 enterprises distributed after their activity field
in the table below. (Table no. 1)
Table no. 1: The number of enterprises according to their activity field
Nr.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Vol. XIV • No. 32 • June 2012

Activity field
Number
IT&C
7
Soft goods
12
Machines and electrical gears
7
TOTAL
26
A synthetic presentation of the enterprises, after the number of employees and after the
fields in which they activate, is made in the next figure (Figure no. 1).
60
50

IT&C

40
30

Fabric and soft goods

20
10
Machines and gears

0
1-9 employees

10-49
employees

50-249
employees

Figure no. 1: The structure of the sample group
In the next table, the small and medium enterprises with export activity have been grouped
according to their last two years turnover (Table no. 2).
Table no. 2: The distribution of the enterprises after their turnover
Nr.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Turnover interval (lei)
under 100.000
100.001-1.000.000
1.000.001-10.000.000
over 10.000.000
Total

Frequency Weight
1
3.8
4
19.2
14
73.1
7
3,9
26
100.0

As it can be noticed from the figure and tables above, for choosing the sample group, we
have selected small and medium enterprises with different personnel number and different
turnover values. This option helps us to identify the impact differences which have been
generated by the global crisis upon the enterprises and how these problems were handled, in
time.
2.3. The target group
The target group is composed by the 26 general managers of the small and medium
enterprises from the sample group. All of them answered to the questionnaire and agreed to
have special meetings for the semi structured interviews.
2.4. Research instrument
For realizing the objectives of the research we have used the following research
instruments: the questionnaire, documents analysis and the semi structured interview.

analysis and it was filled in through telephone conversations. In question formulation from
the questionnaire and from the interview, we considered the purpose of the research and the
specific research objectives.
The semi structured interview helped us, both in the first part of the research process in
collecting the data for the analysis and for the additional step, to developing the data base
required for understanding some detail aspects connected by internal organizational
changes and on the external markets that appeared during the research period. Initially, the
semi structured interview had 5 questions, but in the additional step, we added 3 more
questions.
The documents analysis, as a research instrument, has been used in the first part of the
research process. This helped both for better knowing the general context and to a better
understanding of organizational changes and difficulties which small and medium
enterprises had to handle, since the beginning of the global economic crisis. The documents
we have studied are the following:
 the Romanian national export strategy for 2011-2015;
 the Romanian portal of external trade;
 the reports and studies from the Economy, Trade and Business Environment
Ministry's site;
 forecasts for 2011 and 2012 from National Commission of Prognosis;
 statistic data for 2008-2011 from National Institute of Statistics;
 the information from central data bases of Public Finance Ministry regarding public
institutions and legal entities tax payers' records, the mandatory fiscal declarations, the
balance sheets from 2008-2011 of enterprises and operative records of overdue obligations
towards the state budget.
2.5. The presentation and the analysis of the main results of the research
Research results show that more than half of the general managers of the investigated
enterprises thought that globalization generated more negative effect changes than positive
effect changes for their businesses.
As it can be noticed from the figure below, the enterprises with 1 to 5 employees
experienced the greatest impact of the global crisis, first of all because of the meaningful
reduction of goods and services' demand on external market (figure no. 2). Their managers
have decided to reduce production and to keep a minimum number of employees.
Research results show that, the middle category of enterprises, those with maximum 49
employees, had a different evolution. Those continued to be active, both because they had
secured medium and long term contracts, and because they succeeded to be flexible enough
in their commercial and production policies.
The global crisis influenced less the enterprises with more than 50 employees, mainly
because those cooperate for many years with large multinational enterprises, known on
international markets, to which they provide goods and services in unique and small series
to be assembled in production departments in different parts of the globe.
Another explanation communicated by these enterprises managers was that their prices are
accessible on the external market, by comparison with other similar enterprises. The global
crisis determined very small enterprises specialized in export activities to modify their
production strategies and sales policies. These changes led to a small upswing of the small
and medium enterprises in the second half of 2011 and the beginning of 2012.

80
60
40
20
0
1-9 employees 10-49 employees50-249 employees

60-80
40-60
20-40

Positive effects

0-20

Figure no. 2: The effects of the changes generated by the global crisis
The impact of the crisis on the turnover of small and medium enterprises from the sample
group was slightly different as intensity, as it can be noticed in the chart below (Figure no.
3).

100
Positive
effects

80
60

Negative
effects

40
20
0
(Lei) under
100.000

100.000- 1.000.001over
1.000.000 10.000.000 10.000.000

Figure no. 3: The effects of the change of business environment on turnover
The enterprises with a turnover between 1.000.001 lei and 10.000.000 lei were the most
harmed by the global crisis, mainly because they could not fully respect their contracts.
These enterprises had to endure all the fluctuations and currency differences on
international market. In these conditions, managers explained that they had to make
changes in price policies, meaning that they had to reduce goods and services prices in

services on external markets generated liquidity problems to the enterprises. In this kind of
difficult situations, managers said that they took loans and attracted new financial resources
for production, investments and marketing through European funding projects.
The research demonstrates that in enterprises with turnover higher than 10.000.000 lei, the
global crisis have not had that much of an impact. General managers explained that this
situation was the exclusive result of strategic and tactical measures implemented whenever
the enterprises needed some kind of changes. Some examples of manager's success
initiatives for minimizing the global crisis impact are the following:
 taking development compensated loans with preferential state subsidized interest rate
through EximBank;
 reaching for specialized consulting firms, both in financial-fiscal and in the
international promotion field;
 elaborating and implementing new training projects, investments and international
marketing through European funding projects for small and medium enterprises;
 participating to a large number of international events, such as exhibitions with
goods and services packs.
The research results show that most of the managers believe that market liberalization and
the amplification of commerce, investments and commercial flows, are the main advantages
of globalization. Enterprises managers from fabric industry mentioned that market
liberalization and commerce development are the most important advantages of
globalization. A similar perception is the perception of the ones who activate in external
trade activities with machines and electric gears. Enterprise managers from IT&C industry
believe that globalization stimulated the development of informational products and
technologies and their large scale distribution. They underlined this aspect as an important
globalization generated advantage. In the chart below it can be noticed the comparative
presentation of the research results, which describes the perception of the managers
regarding the impact of globalization on their enterprises (Figure no. 4).
Market liberalization
and commerce
amplification
A higher spread of
technology

Machines and gears
Fabrics and soft goods
IT&C
0%

50%

100%

A higher speed of
transportation

Figure no. 4: The perception regarding globalization impact on enterprises
According to the research results, 65.4% of the managers believe that the multiplication of
financial and economic crises is the main disadvantage of globalization. In the table below
we can notice that, from their point of view, there are others disadvantages caused by the
global crisis, as: the deterioration in revenue distribution, the diminished nation-state role
and international competition (Table no. 3).


Nr. Main disadvantages
Frequency Weight
1. The deterioration in revenue distribution
6
23.1
2. The diminished nation-state role
2
7.7
3. The multiplication of financial and economic crises
17
65.4
4 International competition
1
3.8
Total
26
100.0
In terms of globalization effects over small and medium enterprises, all general managers
agree that globalization process influences the enterprises activity, but their opinions are
different when it comes to measuring the intensity of the impact. Almost 50% of the
managers said that globalization affects their activity very much, while 42.3% believe that
this process affects their activity pretty much.
The research shows that all general managers declared that the changes determined by the
global crisis had an impact over the sustainability of the enterprises lead by them. The
international environment transformations determined the managers involved in our
research to initiate many organizational changes. The chart below shows the intensity of
organizational changes implemented by the target group enterprises for minimizing the
negative impact of the global crisis and for valorizing the major advantages of globalization
(Figure no. 5).

80
60
40
20
0
Low impact
Turnover Turnover Turnover
Over
under
between between 10.000.000
100.000 100.000- 1.000.0011.000.000 10.000.000

60-80
40-60
20-40
0-20

Figure no. 5: The intensity of changes impact on enterprises sustainability
The research facilitated the discovery of the problems and difficulties generated by the
global crisis in small and medium target group enterprises. After collecting managers'
answers, we have obtained the following results:
 96.2% of the enterprises had delays in retrieving the equivalent value of the
delivered goods and services, which determined managers to change their commercial
policies and funding priorities;
 84.6% of the enterprises had a decline in goods and services demand, reason why

 50% of the enterprises had major difficulties in taking loans and that is the reason
why the enterprise management had to rethink the objectives and strategic priorities;
 64.5% of enterprises had to deal with a smaller amount or no liquid assets, and that
determined them to take some firm measures both for recuperating the amounts of money
owed by international beneficiaries and for taking some new loans;
 76.9% of managers believe that the taxes system in Romania is very rough and that
is the reason why they had to reconsider their strategies and policies in all the fields:
production, human resources, research, financial, accounting and commercial.
The measures enumerated by the managers for getting over the above mentioned problems
were the following: minimizing production and labour force expenses; investments based
on subsidized and state warranted loans in order to increase productivity; personnel
reduction because of integrating the newest technologies and valorizing the opportunities of
covering some of the labour force costs through strategic projects funded by structural
programs; entering new markets, both with the support of Romanian institutions and with
the support of international organizations; closing insurance policies for different risks, as
paying delays, for course differences in commercial operations, etc; attracting financial,
human, material resources and technologies through projects funded by European programs
for small and medium enterprises.
Another research hypothesis refers to the impact of governmental measures on
small and medium enterprises from Bucharest, with export based activity. In the table
below are presented the results obtained in research (Table no. 4). It means that the majority
of the enterprises (80.8%) evaluated the governmental measures as inefficient. The other
19.2% thought they were efficient, but belated, incoherent and insufficient.
Table no.4: The evaluation of governmental measures by the business environment
Nr.
crt.
1.
2.
3.

The governmental measures perceived
by the business environment
Efficient
Inefficient
Total

Frequency

Weight

5
21
26

19.2
80.8
100.0

During the two rounds of interviews, managers explained what anti-crisis measures they
have implemented for the enterprises upswing. According to the results 65.4% of the
respondent enterprises reduced the personnel, 38.5% of them reduced employees’ wages,
69.2% reduced constant costs, 73.1% diminished the production, and only 30.8% had
externalized some services for reducing the total costs.
Yet, research results show that general managers from studied enterprises are optimistic
when it comes to the evolution of their business in 2012. Almost 65.4% believe that the
turnover will rise with 5% and the profit with 2-3%. These statements are respondents'
estimations and are based on enterprises' business plans for 2011-2013. During the
interviews from the additional step of the research process, general managers from the
analyzed enterprises explained that those optimistic previsions are based on:
 a more stable international context, by comparison to the beginning of the crisis;
 different European funding opportunities for investments, consulting and
developing, some of them already approved and contracted;
 a better fiscal framework for enterprises who export goods and services, starting this
year;
 lowering banks' interest rate or having no interest rate for short term loans requested
for development and simplifying banks procedures for new business funding lines;
 implementing direct cooperation agreements with banks and other credit funds for
investments and development in small and medium enterprises;
 receiving loans through governmental programs, for example Mihail Kogălniceanu
Program with 70% subsidized interest rate for enterprises who export goods and services,
etc.
Conclusions and recommendation
As the research results show, Bucharest's small and medium enterprises with export
activities, included in the study, were influenced by the global economic crisis, and in the
current paper we showed, both the way the crisis began and the way they acted for
minimizing its effects.
In the analysis section we present and explain the causes and the effects of the global crisis
on the target group enterprises. From other specialists' studies, Olaru Marieta and Dinu
Vasile, we found out that recent years governmental measures have not had the estimated
impact on the Romanian business environment. Our research demonstrated that the
majority of general managers of analyzed enterprises had the same opinion (Androniceanu,
2011).
Research results show the slightly optimistic perception of respondents regarding the
improvement of national and international business environment, as a result of mitigating
recession in some other developed states. They have made optimistic previsions for 2012
based on observed positive results in Romania and in other emerging states where they
have businesses. Although, Romanian specialists' opinions (Olaru, Stoleriu, 2011;
Dobrescu, 2009; Miron, Dima, 2009) regarding the European economic upswing are
different, especially because of some big EU states' economic vulnerability, as: Greece,
Italy, Spain, Portugal and Slovakia.
Starting from this research results we will further present some recommendations for
sustaining the development of small and medium enterprises sector, especially those who
have export activities, as one of the major impact domains to even out the Romanian trade
balance.
One recommendation is to rise the budget allocation for stimulating the competitiveness of
exporting enterprises and the support given by Romanian Govern. The analysts argue that it
will be necessary an additional state capitalization of EximBank to launch new loan lines
and supporting both the SME's and the biggest Romanian exporting enterprises, for those to
be capable to continue their activity between ordering and collection of payments. After
capitalization, EximBank could provide a wide range of financial guarantees for exporters,
representing irrevocably and unconditionally commitments undertaken by EximBank on
activity or for investment projects (Androniceanu, Sora, 2011). To these we add the
stabilization of interest rate on export loans on medium and long term.
A second recommendation is to support small and medium enterprises by providing
consultancy, due to currency risk. Few of them have hedging strategies, including insurance
policies against currency risk. According to an analysis of R&M Audit and Accounting,
hedging strategies are used by large local companies and multinational enterprises only.
Most small and medium enterprises exposed to currency risk, remain at risk, which in the
current crisis conditions is affecting their cash flow. The small and medium enterprises with
export activities should be supported by consultancy to continue to attract European funds
for investments and development projects, to train human resources and to diversify means
of promoting goods and services on foreign markets (Androniceanu, Sora, 2009).
A third recommendation is to reduce taxation for all small and medium enterprises and to
diversify incentives for those engaged in export activities. We believe that a suitable
measure is to halve taxes related to the activity of small firms that export a commodity
produced in Romania. Encouraging exports is a necessity at this time when there is a risk of
entering again into recession, and the engine, which would be export growth for Romanian
economy, cannot be replaced by any other measure.
The fourth recommendation is to diversify the state facilities and incentives for the
Romanian small and medium enterprises in order to increase their access to foreign markets
through: promotion of products and services, fostering communication and partnership in
business and entrepreneurial training in export promotion techniques.
The fifth recommendation is to diversify the funding products and services for Romanian
exporters, and also to insure the commercial and political risk. To these we could add
guarantee products combined as multi-product ceilings, adapted to Romanian exporters
contractual constraints, coupled with an increase in the efficiency of the analysis process of
the requested product or service.
A final recommendation is to strengthen the cooperation between small and medium
enterprises with export based activity and the academic environment, to allow the initiation
of MBA programs adapted to the needs of managers engaged in foreign trade activities,
both by small and medium enterprises or by universities. We appreciate that is necessary to
stimulate the development of partnerships between universities, faculties and the ministries
with export based activity or national associations of export producers.
The research that formed the basis for this paper demonstrates that managers'
professionalism and their ability to innovate and adapt to change, combined with consistent
and coherent governmental measures of economic, social and fiscal policies, are essential
for successful businesses in a turbulent and vulnerable national and international
environment.


