Introduction
There is a long-lasting and ongoing debate about the best method to elicit willingness to pay
(WTP) for contingent valuation (CV) of non-market goods in environmental [1], agricultural [2,
3] and health economics [4, 5]. A fundamental issue in this debate is the question whether openor closed-ended methods lead to more reliable results [6–8]. Traditional CV studies rely on an
open-ended approach in which respondents are free to state any amount they wish to indicate
their WTP [9, 10]. The open-ended method has been criticized for the high cognitive load it
imposes on respondents, a high number of observed non- or zero responses, and the fact that the
distribution of responses is typically heavily skewed towards high amounts which might be
caused by a strategic bias [11]. As an alternative, closed-ended methods have been developed
where respondents select a value from a pre-specified list (payment card) or where WTP is
derived from (a series of) dichotomous choices. Despite the increasing popularity of closedended methods, several methodological issues have been observed. While approaches relying on
payment cards are subject to starting point and range biases (see e.g. [12–14]), dichotomous
choices are statistically inefficient and may be prone to the ‘yea-saying bias‘, i.e. a tendency to
accept presented amounts [14–19]. In view of these issues a number of authors have questioned
the superiority of closed-ended over open-ended methods [7, 8, 14, 17, 20–22].

Data Availability Statement: All data is available on
the project homepage (https://www.ifw-kiel.de/
forschung/umwelt/projekte/accept) and from Figshare
(https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3113050.v1).
Funding: This paper is part of the project ACCEPT,
which is funded by the German Federal Ministry for
Education and Research (grant number 01LA1112A).
The publication of this article was funded by the Open
Access fund of the Leibniz Association. The funders
had no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

A particular factor which contributes to noisy or even biased measurements of WTP is preference uncertainty. Preference uncertainty may be caused by incomplete knowledge about the
features of the object under evaluation or simply by the fact that a person is unsure about her
own preferences [23–27]. Since individuals are typically unable to gain experience of non-market goods through repeated purchase and consumption, preference uncertainty is highly relevant for CV studies [28]. Due to vagueness of preference, people often have only regions of
indifference instead of well-defined indifference curves [29–32], a fact that theoretically contradicts the existence of a single Point-WTP [33–35].
Several CV studies based on closed-ended surveys take preference uncertainty into account.
Ready et al. [36], for example, allow for six response categories in their survey ranging from
‘definitely yes‘ to ‘definitely no‘. Welsh and Poe [37] apply a similar approach. Li and Mattsson
[38] and Champ et al. [39] allow respondents to express their uncertainty on scales from 0% to
100% or from 1 to 10. However, all these approaches involve several problems. All respondents
must interpret the employed scales in the same way and be able to assess their degree of preference uncertainty correctly [40, 41]. Moreover, it is not at all clear how to interpret the obtained
information. For instance Hakansson [41] argues that the statement to be 60% certain to pay
US$100 for a given project should not necessarily be treated as an average WTP of US$60. As
response to this critique, several studies have addressed preference uncertainty by using payment cards to elicit lower (the maximum amount the individual is sure to be willing to pay)
and upper (the minimum amount above the individual is sure to refuse to pay) bounds of
WTP [28, 34, 42–46]. The length of the interval between lower and upper bound can be
regarded as a measure of preference uncertainty in these studies. However, the above mentioned general problems of closed-ended approaches, in particular the starting point and range
biases remain.
The only open-ended CV study which addresses preference uncertainty has been performed
by Hakansson [41]. The design of Hakansson allows respondents to state either an exact
amount or an interval of two amounts as their WTP. The interval is elicited by responses to the
statement ‘I am willing to pay between . . . and . . .’. This means that the bounds of the interval
are not clearly defined as lower (upper) bound of WTP, i.e. the maximum (minimum) amount
for which the individual is sure to (refuses to) pay as in the closed-ended studies mentioned
above. Consequently, respondents could differ in the interpretation of the interval bounds and
also in the degree of uncertainty at which they switch from stating an exact amount to giving
an interval. Nevertheless, the work of Hakansson [41] led to rather promising results.
Recently, a new open-ended WTP elicitation approach was introduced in the marketing literature [35, 33]. Therein, WTP is elicited as a range with properly defined bounds as in the
previous closed-ended studies. We call this approach Range-WTP in comparison to the traditional open-ended Point-WTP where only a single value is elicited. Until now, this method has
been only used for the valuation of market goods, i.e. chocolate and wine.
Our paper has three main goals: Our first goal is to apply the Range-WTP to CV studies for
the valuation of non-market goods. While Wang et al. [35] show that the Range-WTP outperforms the Point-WTP for predicting purchase probabilities of consumer goods, it is still unclear
whether this holds also for our study since preference uncertainty is supposedly much larger
for non-market goods. Our second goal is to compare the performance of Range- and PointWTP for CV studies. In doing so, we use the criterion of theoretical validity of Range-WTP
and compare it to that of Point-WTP. Therefore, we measure the degree to which WTP values
are consistent with theoretical expectations. More precisely, we measure other subjective evaluations of our non-market good and test whether they are related to WTP measures in a consistent way (see Section 3.3 for details). We also check for the stability of our results over time. In
addition, we analyse the test-retest reliability by considering the correlation between the same respondents’ answers at two different points in time. In a broader sense we want to contribute
to the issue whether the earlier criticism on open-ended methods can be watered down by eliciting ranges. To the best of our knowledge, no previous paper has compared theoretical validity
of two open-ended methods. Our third goal is to provide empirical evidence for our test case,
the avoidance of the use of solar radiation management (SRM), a climate engineering technique that aims to counteract climate change by the injection of sulphate aerosols into the
stratosphere [47, 48]. Apart from mitigation of carbon emissions, SRM has been discussed as
an option for achieving the two-degree climate target. Since most people have never heard of
SRM (see e.g. [49, 50]), preference uncertainty should be rather high for SRM. This is ideal for
testing the performance of Range-WTP.
To compare the theoretical validity of Range- and Point-WTP, we conducted two large online
surveys on SRM in Germany with a total number of nearly 1,500 participants. Both surveys were
identically structured and all respondents received the same information before stating their preferences. However, in Survey A we elicited Point-WTP whereas in Survey B we elicited RangeWTP. This provides for an adequate comparison of response differences. To test for the stability
of our results over time and for the test-retest reliability of both methods, we conducted a followup study in which about 800 of the initial 1,500 respondents participated.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces our conceptual
framework and provides an overview of the elicitation approach. Section 3 outlines our data
and survey design (3.1), WTP elicitation in more detail (3.2) and the test of validity and reliability (3.3). Section 4 discusses the results and section 5 concludes.

Conceptual Framework
As argued above, asking for single Point-WTP may not be justified in the case of preference
uncertainty, i.e. if well-defined indifference curves do not exist. To see this formally, consider a
person with initial wealth y who is thinking about buying good x. Obviously, she will buy the
good for price p if (x, y-p) 1 y, where 1 is the asymmetric part of her binary preference relation. In the case of thick indifference curves, the Point-WTP implicitly given by (x, y–WTP) ~y
may not be well-defined. However, there exist an upper (WTPU) and lower (WTPL) bound of
WTP defined by WTPU = inf{p | y 1 (x, y–p)} and WTPL = sup{p | (x, y–p) 1 y}, see Fig 1. If
preferences are continuous, i.e. if indifference curves are thin, the area of imprecise preferences
will collapse such that WTPU = WTPL = Point-WTP.
Wang et al. (2007) were the first to develop an open-ended approach where WTP is measured as the range between WTPL and WTPU rather than as a point. In a set-up involving 175
customers, they test the range approach in an experimental elicitation of consumers’ reservation prices for chocolate and red wine. They assume linear decreasing purchase probabilities
between the lower bound (100%), indifference range (50%) and upper bound (0%). A lottery
ensures incentive compatibility, e.g. if the randomly drawn lottery price is lower than the lower
bound, then the respondent must buy the good at the drawn lottery price. They conclude that
Range-WTP yields better predictions for actual buying probabilities than Point-WTP. Dost
and Wilken [33] build on the Wang et al. [35] approach but drop the elicitation of an indifference point and restrict the assumption of linear decreasing purchase probabilities. They test the range on a study of caffè latte and show that the traditional Point-WTP approach reveals
the midpoint of the range. The only non-market CV study is Hakansson [41]. Hakansson [41]
elicits the WTP for increasing the number of wild salmon in a Swedish river. She proposes a
similar approach though, as pointed out above, the interval bounds in her study are not clearly
defined as WTPL and WTPU.
Our approach redefines, applies and tests the Range-WTP method proposed by Wang et al.
[35]. Building on their initial approach, we ask respondents to provide a lower-bound WTP
and an upper-bound WTP. Logic suggests that the upper bound should be identical to or
exceed the lower bound of WTP. Unlike Wang et al. [35], we apply the Range-WTP method to
a public good rather than to consumer goods such as chocolate or red wine. We follow Dost
and Wilken [33] and drop the elicitation of an indifference price. We do not incentivise
respondents and abstain from use of a lottery. This ensures that the method is survey-compatible and easy to understand for survey respondents. While Wang et al. [35] show that RangeWTP is a better predictor of actual purchase probabilities for consumer goods as compared to
Point-WTP, it remains an open question whether the range method is suitable for CV studies
on non-market goods. This is particularly true as the marketing studies have applied the range
method only to goods with very low preference uncertainty (chocolate, wine, coffee) while for
our good (SRM) preference uncertainty should be rather high.
In order to investigate the suitability of Range-WTP for CV studies, theoretical validity,
test-retest reliability and stability of results over time are important criteria. Theoretical validity, which is a subgroup of construct validity [51], can be defined as the degree to which the
empirical findings are consistent with theoretical expectations [12]. A number of existing studies compare the theoretical validity of different evaluation measures for environmental goods
(e.g. [51–53]). Closely related to our study are Bateman et al. [54, 55], who in a study on
national parks in the UK compare the theoretical validity of Point-WTP with that of the iterative bidding approach. The authors find that in line with theoretical expectations, the values
elicited by Point-WTP are determined by a number of socio-economic factors such as income.
Accordingly, they conclude that Point-WTP fulfils the criterion of theoretical validity. By contrast, Ressurreicao et al. [56] find that in their study on species loss in the open sea Point-WTP
does not fulfil the criterion of theoretical validity. The authors show that in terms of theoretical
validity the closed-ended payment card method outperforms the Point-WTP method. Ressurreicao et al. [56] argue that the Point-WTP method may not be suitable for more complex
issues, as they consider the valuation of all marine species a too complex a task for respondents.
Unlike our paper, these and other existing studies compare the traditional open-ended PointWTP method with a closed-ended method.
As far as we know, no study has yet compared the theoretical validity of two open-ended
methods, as we do in this paper by comparing the open-ended Point-WTP method with the
open-ended Range-WTP method. Nor are we aware of any studies that have analysed whether
results concerning theoretical validity are stable over time. We also investigate the test-retest
reliability of the Range- and Point-WTP methods. Test-retest reliability of WTP measures is
defined as the correlation between responses measured at different points in time with the
same sample [57] and has been addressed in several previous CV studies (e.g. [58, 59]).

Methodology and Data
Ethics statement
Our data comes from an internet survey organized by a professional survey institute. Participants are registered at this institute and receive a monetary compensation for every survey they
perform. Our survey only involved questions about sociodemographic data and personal attitudes without e.g. the possibility of losing money or incurring any other harm. Authors
have access to anonymized personal information of respondents (birth date, occupation,
income class, but not to names, address). All data was provided by the respondents voluntarily,
i.e. they did not have to answer these questions. All data was anonymized by the survey
institute.
Ethical approval for such type of surveys is required neither by our academic institution nor
by the survey institute. There was no waiver of ethical approvement obtained for this study.
Participants registered for the survey and agreed to participate (written consent). They could
leave and stop the survey at any time; the answer ‘don’t know’ was possible for every question.

Data and Survey Design
Our study uses novel data from two surveys of representative internet users on SRM that we
conducted in July 2014 and in August 2013 with two follow-up surveys in August 2014. The
surveys were structured identically and differed only with respect to the WTP elicitation
method. In Survey A, conducted in July 2014, WTP was elicited using the Point-WTP method.
In Survey B, conducted in August 2013, WTP was elicited using the Range-WTP method. Our
working samples consist of 776 (Survey A) and 663 (Survey B) observations. In the two followup studies conducted in August 2014 (referred to as Surveys AÃ and BÃ ), we repeated Survey A
and B with a subset of original respondents (468 and 303 respectively). All respondents aged 18
or above were recruited via a professional online panel. They were sampled using quotas for
gender, age and place of residence (federal state). In Survey A (B) the average age was 47 (46)
years; 53% (49%) of our respondents were male; 34% (34%) of our respondents have a higher
education entrance certificate.
The surveys were structured as follows: First, all respondents were asked about the current
level of their SRM awareness. Then they were all shown the same information video about
SRM. The video provided respondents with information on SRM using animated graphics.
The animations were supported by verbal explanations spoken by a professional radio presenter. Respondents who were not able to listen to or to play the video were excluded at the
beginning of the survey. It was not possible to fast-forward the video or skip parts of it. The
video first provided respondents with information on anthropogenic climate change and its
likely consequences and explained the two-degree target. The video then introduced mitigation, adaptation and SRM as three possibilities of tackling climate change. Subsequently, the
video explained SRM in more detail, i.e. its underlying mechanisms and its impact on climate
change, the current state of research and the potential benefits and risks of SRM. The information was based on peer-reviewed papers and scientific reports (taken from, e.g., [47, 60–62]).
External experts checked the information for correctness and clarity. An English translation of
the German video script is provided in the Supporting Information (S2 File). After watching
the video, we asked respondents about the clarity of the information provided on the video.
For each survey, more than 98% of the respondents indicated that they had understood the
video well or very well.
After this initial information stage on the subject of SRM, we proceeded to elicit the respondents’ acceptance of SRM. Respondents were asked about their level of agreement (or otherwise) ‘to using SRM to counteract climate change‘. Potential answers ranged from 1 (‘strongly
disagree’) to 4 (‘strongly agree’). Next, respondents were asked to assess the risks and benefits
of SRM using a scale from 1 (‘very small’) to 4 (‘very large). Subsequently, we elicited respondents’ WTP, using either the Point-WTP method (Survey A) or the Range-WTP method (Survey B). The WTP questions are described in more detail in section 3.2. We then elicited
respondents’ emotional response to SRM. Respondents were asked how strongly they experienced various positive reactions (delight, satisfaction, hopefulness, relief) and negative
responses (worry, fear, sadness, anger, annoyance) when thinking about SRM, using a scale
from 1 (‘not at all’) to 4 (‘strongly’). In our analysis, we summarised negative and positive emotions in a composite index. Finally, we collected information on the respondents’ gender, age,
income and education. A respondent with a higher-education entrance certificate is coded as
having a high level of education.
Tables A-I in S1 Table contain summary statistics for all survey items used in our analysis.

Willingness to Pay Elicitation
In both surveys, respondents were first asked to consider a hypothetical situation in which
there were two potential ways of achieving the two-degree target, one being SRM, the other
increased investment in renewable energy and improvement of energy efficiency (EE). Respondents were then asked whether they would prefer SRM or EE as a way of achieving the twodegree target. ‘Don’t know’ answers were also possible. Respondents thus first expressed their
preferences for or against using SRM. We included this first question to ensure that respondents would state their WTP and not their WTA in the actual WTP question. In a follow-up
question, respondents were then asked to assume that their chosen option would be more
costly to realise than the alternative option. If, for instance, a respondent chose EE, we asked
her to assume that it would be more costly to reach the two-degree target via EE than via SRM.
Respondents were then asked to state their WTP either for the avoidance of SRM via EE (if
they chose EE) or for the avoidance of EE via SRM (if they chose SRM). For the exact wording
of the questions, see S1 File in the Supporting Information.
In Survey A we elicit Point-WTP. Taking the example of a respondent who chose EE over
SRM, we asked her to state the maximum amount of money she would be willing to pay each
month for the avoidance of SRM via EE. In Survey B, by contrast, we elicit Range-WTP.
Respondents were asked to state a lower and an upper bound of WTP. Taking the same example of a respondent who chose EE over SRM, the lower bound of Range-WTP was elicited by
asking the respondent to state the monthly amount of money that she would definitely be willing to pay to ensure avoidance of SRM via EE. The upper bound was elicited by asking the
respondent to state the monthly payment at, or above, which she would definitely no longer
prefer EE to SRM. We refer to the averages of the lower and upper WTP bounds as RangeWTP.
Regarding stated WTP values, our analysis considers only WTP values that are non-negative
and smaller than EUR 500. Values above EUR 500 Euro were winsorised by setting them equal
to EUR 500. In literature, winsorising is a standard approach to curtailing the influence of outliers (see e.g. [63]). Also, very high WTP values may simply reflect inaccurate answers or protest against the use of SRM. For Range-WTP we only consider WTP values if the stated value
for the upper WTP bound is above the lower bound value. Finally, for respondents stating only
one WTP value in the Range-WTP survey, we used this value as lower and upper bound, as it
seemed legitimate to assume that those 12 respondents were certain about their preferences.
However, excluding these observations leaves our results as described below unchanged.

Validity and Reliability
We also compared and analysed the performance of the range and point methods with respect
to theoretical validity and test-retest reliability. To address theoretical validity, we analyse
whether the stated WTP values coincide and correlate with other objective or subjective factors.
Logic suggests that these should be systematically related to the stated WTP values [64]. In this
way, we not only elicited respondents’ WTP for the avoidance of SRM but also their self-reported acceptance of SRM, their risk perception for SRM and other perception measures.
Obviously, these perception measures should be related to the respondents’ WTP. For instance,
respondents who disagree with the use of SRM or who perceive the risks of SRM as severe
should display a higher WTP value for the avoidance of SRM. We further analyse the test-retest
reliability of the two methods by considering the correlation between the same respondents’
answers at two different points in time [57]. Furthermore, we test whether our results on theoretical validity are stable over time (section 4.2.4).

Empirical Findings
We first describe our findings on acceptance and WTP for the two surveys separately (section
4.1), proceeding from there to compare the theoretical validity of the two WTP methods (section 4.2). We start by analysing how the correlation with acceptance differs between the two
WTP methods (section 4.2.1). We then extend our analysis and also consider the correlation of
WTP values with other perception measures such as risk perception (section 4.2.2). In addition,
we report robustness checks, where we also show that all our results are robust to changes in
the threshold of the WTP values (section 4.2.3). Finally, we test whether our results on theoretical validity are stable over time (section 4.2.4).
In the following, we restrict our analysis to the overwhelming majority of respondents in
both surveys who chose EE (86% in Survey A, 90% in Survey B). We refer to the averages of the
lower and upper WTP bounds as Range-WTP.

Descriptive Findings
Fig 2 illustrates our findings on the acceptance of SRM in the two surveys. In Survey A, 61% of
all respondents stated that they disagreed either strongly or to some extent with the use of SRM
to counteract climate change. By contrast, only 29% of the respondents agreed either somewhat
or strongly with the use of SRM.
The figures are almost identical for Survey B. Here, 61% of the respondents disagreed with
the use of SRM and only a minority of 28% agreed. Overall, we find virtually identical levels of

Fig 2. Acceptance of SRM in Survey A (Point-WTP) and Survey B (Range-WTP). Note: The survey asked the following question: ‘Please state your level
of (dis)agreement with the following statement: We should use SRM to counteract climate change.’acceptance in the two surveys (Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.6930). Moreover, the overwhelming majority in both surveys chose EE (86% in Survey A, 90% in Survey B) over SRM.
Up to this point, both surveys were exactly identical. In fact, we find almost identical levels
of choice and acceptance of SRM in the two surveys. The results of the two surveys are, therefore, highly consistent. However, when we apply the two methods to eliciting the WTP of
respondents and compare the WTP figures for both methods, we find major differences. For
Survey A (Point-WTP) we find a mean WTP of EUR 44 for EE and a median WTP of EUR 20.
Overall, 12% of the respondents reported a Point-WTP of zero. In Survey B (Range-WTP), we
find that the mean of the lower bound WTP for EE is EUR 52 and the mean of the upper
bound WTP value is EUR 126. The mean WTP value of the Range-WTP, the averages of the
lower and upper WTP bounds, is EUR 89 (with a median of EUR 55). Here, 6% of the respondents reported a Range-WTP of zero.
Overall, we thus find that the stated WTP values differ greatly between Survey A and Survey
B although the levels of acceptance do not. It is at first sight somewhat puzzling that the lower
bound of Range-WTP exceeds Point-WTP. Wang et al. [35] argue that the lower bound should
be close to Point-WTP and for chocolate their lower bound is also larger than Point-WTP. In
our study, differences may also be due to the time interval between both surveys, probably due
to an increasing awareness of climate change. In fact, in the follow-up studies, which we report
on in section 4.2.4, Point-WTP and lower bound are nearly identical. A potential explanation
for why the lower bound is close to the Point-WTP is that respondents take the lower bound as
a reference point for their valuations. The lower bound therefore acts as an anchor for determining the Point-WTP. There is ample evidence that there is insufficient adjustment in the
case of anchoring [65]. This implies in our case that the Point-WTP is close to the lower
bound. However, in the present study we are not primarily interested in the absolute size of
WTP measures but in their theoretical validity, which is what we analyse next.

Theoretical Validity of Willingness to Pay Measures
Acceptance and Willingness to Pay. In a first step, we test whether the general decision to
choose EE instead of SRM is negatively correlated with the acceptance of SRM. We expect a
negative correlation: respondents who choose EE should also disagree with the use of SRM.
We find for both surveys that the choice of EE over SRM is strongly negatively correlated
with the stated acceptance of SRM. The correlation is -0.4987 (p-value of 0.0000) in Survey A
and 0.4766 (p-value of 0.0000) in Survey B. Therefore, as expected, respondents who disagree
with the use of SRM also choose EE over SRM. This is true for both surveys, so the results of
the surveys are again highly consistent.
In a second step, we then tested whether respondents who disagree (agree) strongly with using
SRM to counteract climate change also revealed higher (lower) WTP for the avoidance of SRM.
In the presence of theoretical validity, WTP for the avoidance of SRM should be negatively related
with the acceptance of SRM. Surprisingly, we find that Point-WTP is not significantly correlated
with acceptance. The correlation is low (0.0297) and insignificant, with a p-value of 0.4868. Using
the Point-WTP method, we therefore find no evidence for the hypothesis that respondents who
are less agreeable to using SRM also have higher WTP for the avoidance of SRM. Accordingly, the
Point-WTP method does not seem to satisfy the theoretical validity criterion.
Further evidence comes from Fig 3, which visualises the relation between acceptance and
Point-WTP in a boxplot diagram. Median WTP remains almost unchanged between the categories and is even the same for the categories of ‘strongly disagree’ and ‘somewhat agree’ (EUR
20). Theoretically, respondents who ‘strongly disagree’ with the use of SRM should state a
higher WTP than respondents who ‘somewhat agree’ with its use. However, the boxplot diagram does not provide any evidence for this prediction. In fact, we find that median WTP is
EUR 5 higher for those respondents who ‘somewhat disagree’ than for those who ‘strongly disagree’. This finding again runs counter to theoretical expectations.
In contrast to our previous result, we find a strong and statistically significant negative correlation of -0.2438 (p-value of 0.000) between acceptance and Range-WTP. We also find highly
statistically significant correlations between acceptance and the upper bound (correlation of
-0.2637, p-value of 0.0000) and lower bound (correlation of -0.1398, p-value of 0.0025) of
Range-WTP. Accordingly, respondents who reveal lower levels of acceptance are indeed willing to pay more for the avoidance of SRM via EE. Using Range-WTP, we therefore find evidence for the theoretical proposition that acceptance of SRM and WTP for the avoidance of
SRM are negatively related.
Fig 4 shows that the median of Range-WTP decreases with higher levels of acceptance.
Median Range-WTP is EUR 75 for those who ‘strongly disagree’ but only EUR 27.5 for those
who ‘strongly agree’. Therefore, the median declines by almost EUR 50 as we move from the
lowest to the highest acceptance category.
We also control for systematic differences in respondents’ socio-demographic characteristics and their level of awareness of SRM by analysing the theoretical validity of both measures
for subgroups of the sample.
Our findings on the correlation between acceptance and WTP also hold for different subgroups of the sample (defined by awareness, i.e. whether respondents had heard or not heard
about SRM before the time of our survey, gender, education, age and income). Table 1 summarises these findings. For all different subgroups, not only Range-WTP but also its lower and
upper bound are statistically significantly correlated with acceptance (results not shown).
There is only one exception. The correlation between the lower bound and acceptance is not
statistically significant for respondents aged 49 or above. In sharp contrast to the findings for
Range-WTP, Point-WTP is not correlated with acceptance for any subgroup.
In summary, we find that Range-WTP is highly correlated with acceptance. In terms of theoretical validity, Range-WTP thus seems to outperform Point-WTP, which is not correlated
with acceptance at all. Our analysis focuses on the large majority of respondents who chose EE.
Yet, we find similar results when we focus on respondents who chose SRM instead. The Point-WTP is uncorrelated with acceptance (correlation coefficient 0.1239, p-value 0.2446, N = 90),
whereas the Range-WTP is positively correlated with acceptance (correlation coefficient
0.3210, p-value 0.0230, N = 50).
Perception Measures and Willingness to Pay. We have shown that acceptance is not correlated with Point-WTP but highly negatively correlated with Range-WTP. We now analyse
whether these findings also hold for other perception measures, such as risk and benefit perceptions or emotions about SRM. Our expectation is that respondents who perceive the risks of
SRM to be more severe or who are more concerned about the use of SRM will also be willing to
pay more for its avoidance. Table 2 shows how different perception measures are correlated
with Range-WTP and Point-WTP.
Again we find that, in terms of theoretical validity, Range-WTP performs much better than
Point-WTP. Point-WTP is not correlated with any of the perception measures. By contrast,
Range-WTP is significantly correlated with all perception measures. Range-WTP is, for
instance, positively correlated with respondents’ risk perception. Respondents who perceive
the risks of SRM to be appreciably severe are also willing to pay more for the avoidance of
SRM. We also find a statistically significant positive correlation between Range-WTP and negative emotions towards SRM. Respondents who are concerned, angry or anxious display a
higher WTP for the avoidance of SRM via EE. Also, the lower and upper bound of Range-WTP
are statistically significantly correlated with all other perception measures (results not shown).
There is only one exception. The correlation between the lower bound and benefit perception
is not significant. Importantly, we find these relations only for Range-WTP and not for PointWTP. The results strengthen our conclusion that the range method clearly outperforms the
point method in terms of theoretical validity.
Robustness. As robustness check, we have set the threshold of EUR 500 to EUR 200 and
winsorised the data by setting all WTP values of more than 200 to the upper bound of 200. Also,
instead of winsorising the data to a certain threshold, we excluded all observations with WTP values of more than EUR 500 (200). Finally, we also excluded values above the 95% percentile. In all
cases our results remain qualitatively unchanged. Details are available upon request.
Reliability and stability. In a follow-up surveys, we investigated whether our results were
reliable and stable over time. First, we analysed the test-retest reliability of the two methods. To

Table 1. Correlation of acceptance and WTP.
Range-WTP

Point-WTP

-0.2438 ***

0.0297

(0.0000)

(0.4868)

N = 465

All

N = 552

-0.2120 ***

0.0512

(0.0001)

Awareness: No

(0.2929)

N = 355

N = 424

-0.3216 ***

-0.0226

(0.0006)

(0.8003)

N = 110

Awareness: Yes

N = 128

-0.2454 ***

0.0110

(0.0001)

(0.8465)

N = 235

Men

N = 312

-0.2428 ***

0.0588

(0.0002)

(0.3645)

N = 230

Women

N = 240

-0.2154 ***

0.0748

(0.0002)

Education not high

(0.1627)

N = 295

-0.0455
(0.5199)

N = 170
Age < = 49 years

N = 350

-0.2954 ***
(0.0001)

Education high

N = 202
0.0613

(0.0000)

(0.3242)

N = 247
Age >49 years

-0.2955 ***

N = 261
-0.0048

(0.0041)

(0.9347)

N = 218
Income < = 2500 Euro

-0.1935 ***

N = 291
0.0792

(0.0012)

(0.1786)

N = 220
Income > 2500 Euro

-0.2170 ***

N = 290

-0.2709 ***

-0.0377

(0.0000)

(0.5431)

N = 245

N = 262

Note: p-values in parentheses.
*
p < 0.10
**

p < 0.05

***

p < 0.01.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0154078.t001

do so, we analysed the correlation between the same respondents’ WTP at two different points
in time. Second, we checked whether our results on the theoretical validity of the WTP methods were stable over time. For these purposes, we repeated both surveys in August 2014 and
again asked the respondents to state their acceptance and WTP. Overall, 468 of the original
respondents participated in follow-up Survey AÃ (60%) and 303 in follow-up Survey BÃ (46%).
As with the original surveys, both follow-up surveys were structured identically and differed
only with respect to the WTP elicitation method. In follow-up Survey AÃ , respondents were
again asked to state the Point-WTP, whereas in follow-up Survey BÃ respondents were again

Table 2. Correlation of perception measures and WTP.
Perception measures

Range-WTP

Point-WTP
-0.0304
(0.4749)

-0.1458 ***

0.0184

(0.0018)

Beneﬁt perception

0.2169 ***
(0.0000)

Risk perception

(0.6677)

0.2280 ***

-0.0521

(0.0000)

Negative emotions

(0.2134)

-0.1516 ***

0.0539

(0.0009)

Positive emotions

(0.1998)

Note: P values in parentheses.
*
p < 0.10
**

p < 0.05

***

p < 0.01.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0154078.t002

asked to state the Range-WTP. Note that the time difference between Survey A and its followup Survey AÃ is one year, whereas the time difference between Survey B and its follow-up Survey BÃ is one month. However, we do not expect the length of the time difference to influence
the reliability and stability of our results. The time length should have a similar effect on both
measures, WTP value and acceptance, so that the correlation between the two remains stable.
For both surveys, we find that WTP decreased over time. In follow-up Survey AÃ , the mean
of the Point-WTP is EUR 32 (with a median of EUR 20) and is, therefore, almost EUR 12
lower than in the initial Survey A. In follow-up Survey BÃ , the mean of the Range-WTP is EUR
65 (with a median of EUR 35, a lower bound of EUR 33 and an upper bound of EUR 97) and is
therefore EUR 24 lower than in the initial Survey B. Interestingly, the lower bound of the
Range-WTP and the Point-WTP are now, as in the studies of Wang et al. [35], almost identical.
The somewhat larger difference between the lower bound and the Point-WTP in the initial surveys may, therefore, indeed be due to the time interval between the initial Surveys A and B.
If we restrict the sample of the initial Surveys A and B to those respondents who participated
in the follow-up survey, we also find a decrease in WTP. In fact, the mean Point-WTP for the
restricted sample of the initial Survey A is EUR 43 and is, therefore, almost identical to the
mean Point-WTP for the complete sample of the initial Survey A (mean Point-WTP of EUR
44). The mean Range-WTP for the restricted sample of the initial Survey B is EUR 87 (with a
lower bound of EUR 48 and an upper bound of EUR 126) and is, therefore, also almost identical to the mean Range-WTP for the complete sample of the initial Survey B (mean RangeWTP EUR 89, with a lower bound of EUR 52 and an upper bound of EUR 126).
Analysing the test-retest reliability of the two methods, we find for both methods a high and
statistically significant correlation between the WTP values over time (Point-WTP: correlation
of 0.4469, p-value of 0.0000; Range-WTP: correlation of 0.4240, p-value of 0.0000). Therefore
both methods fulfil the criterion of test-retest reliability.
Analysing the stability of our results over time, the two follow-up surveys confirm our previous results on the theoretical validity of the two WTP methods. For follow-up Survey AÃ , we
find that the correlation between acceptance and Point-WTP is small (0.0095) and statistically
insignificant (p-value of 0.8621). Accordingly, the Point-WTP again fails to satisfy the criterion
of theoretical validity. For follow-up Survey BÃ , by contrast, we find that the correlation
between acceptance and Range-WTP is strong (-0.2036) and highly statistically significant (pvalue of 0.0042). If we restrict the initial samples of Survey A and Survey B to those

Table 3. Correlation of perception measures and WTP.
Perception measures

Range-WTPSurvey A*

Risk perception

0.2530*

0.0482

(0.0005)

(0.3742)

Beneﬁt perception

-0.1894 *

0.0890

(0.0096)

(0.1050)

Negative emotions

0.2493 *

0.1054**

(0.0003)

(0.0440)

Positive emotions

Point-WTPSurvey B*

-0.0814

0.0873*

(0.2422)

(0.0953)

Note: P values in parentheses.
*
p < 0.10
**

p < 0.05

***

p < 0.01.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0154078.t003

respondents that participated in the follow-up survey, the above results are confirmed. We find
no statistically significant correlation between acceptance and Point-WTP (p-value of 0.6949)
but a highly statistically significant correlation for Range-WTP (p-value of 0.0002).
Table 3 shows how different perception measures are correlated with Range-WTP and
Point-WTP for the follow-up surveys AÃ and BÃ . Again we find that, in terms of stability of theoretical validity over time, Range-WTP performs better than Point-WTP. Range-WTP is significantly correlated with all perception measures except for positive emotions. In contrast,
Point-WTP is correlated with negative emotions, but is uncorrelated with risk and benefit perception and it even reveals the wrong sign for positive emotions.
Accordingly, Range-WTP also meets the criterion of theoretical validity in the follow-up
survey, conducted a full year after the initial survey. This finding further strengthens our conclusion that the Range-WTP method clearly outperforms the Point-WTP method.

Discussion and Conclusion
This paper compares two different open-ended methods of eliciting WTP. The first method,
probably the most widely used method in practice, elicits WTP as a point. The second method
elicits WTP as a range. One major criticism of the Point-WTP method is that it implicitly
assumes that respondents know their preferences with certainty. Only under this assumption
are they able to state one exact WTP value. By contrast, the Range-WTP method allows for
preference uncertainty: respondents are free to state a range of values.
We compare the performance of both methods using the criterion of theoretical validity.
The specific case we consider is WTP for the avoidance of SRM via increased investment in
renewable energy and an improvement in energy efficiency (EE). At present, SRM is a relatively
little-known technique for counteracting climate change and we expect respondents to exhibit
a high degree of preference uncertainty. To analyse the theoretical validity of the two WTP
methods, we conducted two large scale surveys in Germany eliciting respondents’ attitudes
towards SRM and their WTP for the avoidance of SRM. The surveys were structured identically
and differed only with respect to the respective WTP method. Survey A elicited WTP as a
point, Survey B as a range. In two follow-up studies we repeated Survey A and B with the same
set of respondents. We analysed the test-retest reliability of the two methods and studied
whether the stated WTP values correlate over time. Furthermore, we analysed whether our
results on the theoretical validity of the WTP methods were stable over time.

Our results are as follows: First, the stated WTP for the avoidance of SRM via EE differs
strongly between the two surveys and thus depends on the WTP method used. Mean WTP elicited by the Point-WTP method is EUR 44, whereas mean Range-WTP is EUR 89. In contrast
to Dost and Wilken [33] we thus cannot find any evidence that the mean of the Range-WTP
equals the Point-WTP. The main reason for this difference seems to be the fact that Dost and
Wilken [33] elicit valuations for a cup of coffee where, in sharp contrast to SRM, no preference
uncertainties should be involved and market prices are known, i.e. where application of the
range method seems limited. Nor did we find any evidence for the hypothesis mooted by
Hakansson [41], who argues that the lower and upper bounds may provide a kind of confidence interval for Point-WTP. Our follow-up surveys confirm notably the results by Wang
et al. [35], who find that the lower bound of Range-WTP is close to Point-WTP.
Second, we find a strong and statistically significant negative correlation between acceptance
of SRM and Range-WTP. Respondents who disagree (agree) strongly with the use of SRM to
counteract climate change also display a high (low) WTP for the avoidance of SRM. Accordingly, Range-WTP fulfils the criterion of theoretical validity. By contrast, acceptance and
Point-WTP are uncorrelated. Therefore, the Point-WTP method does not meet the criterion of
theoretical validity. Third, comparing the original with the follow-up surveys, we find that both
methods fulfil the test-retest reliability criterion, since WTP values are highly correlated over
both elicitations. Fourth, we show that the statistically significant negative correlation between
acceptance and Range-WTP remains stable over time.
SRM is a relatively new technique that has hitherto been mostly discussed by experts and is
largely unknown to the broader public. Yet the traditional Point-WTP method requires that
respondents know their preferences with certainty and that they are familiar with the good in
question so as to ensure that the elicited WTP values are reliable and valid [12]. By contrast, the
Range-WTP method allows for preference uncertainty as it elicits more information about
respondents’ preferences. While uncertain respondents are free to state a range of values, respondents who are certain about their preferences can also state equal lower and upper bounds. Therefore the range provides more information on respondents’ preferences than a single point. In our
application, the upper bound of the range shows the strongest correlation with acceptance.
Our results support earlier criticism of the traditional open-ended Point-WTP method. We put
forward and test an alternative open-ended approach, the Range-WTP method, which addresses
this criticism. Given the increasing evidence on distortions induced by the use of closed-ended
methods (i.e. starting point, range, and yea-saying biases) we believe that our results provide strong
reasons to revive the interest in open-ended methods. Besides the richer set of information on individual preferences provided by open-ended methods they also have advantages for studies devoted
to more than one country [10, 41]. Preference uncertainty could be regarded as one major reason
for the poor empirical performance of open-ended Point-WTP; Range-WTP, at least in our studies,
improves measurement substantially. Given these results, an important route for future research is
to compare the performance of open- and closed-ended elicitation of WTP intervals.