
INTRODUCTION

Logistics plays an important role in the work towards
sustainable development [1]. Present logistics systems
are contributors to large environmental and social
threats. Research on sustainable logistics has grown
steadily during the last decade [26], but despite that,
the area is limited when it comes to innovative
thinking. As present ways of designing and managing
logistics system is far from sustainable, new ways of
thinking and acting is a prerequisite for sustainable
logistics. The important role of innovations in
sustainable logistics was indicated in the literature
review by Touboulic and Walker [26], however
commonly stressing the environmental dimension.
However, few studies have related sustainability to
innovation in a logistics context [23]. For example,
after reviewing 150 Nordic dissertations within
logistics and supply chain management, Rajkumar et
al. [21] conclude that innovation is one of five underprioritized areas.
The research streams of logistics and innovation
have developed somehow isolated [2]. A large value
can be found in relating sustainable logistics to
innovation into one concept. Some examples of
sustainable logistics innovation (SLI) in practice have
been found. Rossi et al. [22] studied SLIs and gave
some brief descriptions on transport innovations
within logistics service providers (LSPs), such as
rationalization of routes and the replacement of diesel
engines with batteries. Logistics innovations also have
a focus on LSPs [5]. Wu and Haasis [28] mention the
use of energy-saving technologies as one example of
[18].
These examples indicate limitations of how SLIs
have been presented in the literature so far: stressing
the environmental dimension, focusing on LSPs, on
technical and less radical forms of innovations. A
focus on technological innovations was also found in
the logistics innovation literature, together with a
focus on less radical innovations (e.g. [5]). Striving
towards sustainable logistics, it is problematic if
researchers convey a limited view to practitioners of
what constitutes an SLI is or where it can be
implemented. On a societal level, no one can afford
not to address SLIs outside these limitations. Such an
expansion is likely to add important insights regarding
potential SLIs to be implemented.
When defining sustainable innovation, Klewitz and
Hansen [17] included the triple bottom line and
stressed that the innovation should be new to the firm.
Accepting these assumptions, SLIs should
furthermore include logistics. Academic innovation
definitions need to better cover many innovation
dimensions, in order to make them more concrete and
applicable [2]. In order to fully understand SLIs, the
dimensions that have to be taken into account can be
illustrated in a framework. Few studies have
presented frameworks to illustrate sustainable
logistics innovations. Two of them [22, 30] are typical
examples of the limited view on SLI, focusing on just
environmental innovation in just LSPs. A broader
view of potential dimensions can be found in the
innovation literature, once again stressing the
importance of actually relating sustainable logistics to
innovation into one concept. An expanded framework
illustrating the multidimensional nature of SLIs,
implies that a classification of existing SLIs is
provided. It can also create consciousness and be an
eye-opener for lacking or potential SLIs in practice.
Such a framework can improve the less developed
conceptualization of logistics innovation (in line with
[2]) and lead to a more systematic and covering
development of SLIs.
If it is qualifying that innovations are new to the
firm, striving to develop sustainable logistics can
include both own and other firms’ SLIs. In both
situations, a multidimensional framework of SLIs,
outside the prevailing limitations, can support and add
insights to practitioners. An expanded view on SLIs
could offer researchers better understanding and a
contribution to how to further study or develop SLIs.
In order to inspire researchers and practitioners to
expand their mindset when addressing sustainable
logistics, the purpose of this paper is to develop a
framework for classifying sustainable logistics
innovations, and evaluating the applicability of the
framework.

2

METHODOLOGY

The overall methodologies applied build upon a twostep approach; first a literature review is conducted,
second a case study is carried out. The literature
review was conducted in the data bases Business
Source Premier and Google Scholar, using search
terms such as sustainab*, logistic*, innovate* and
framework in different combinations. The major
search was made in 2016, with a complementary
search late in 2017. Most of the articles identified
were found usable and thereby included in this article.
It was important to go outside the limitations in
previous research that stress the environmental
sustainability dimension, focus on LSPs and transport,
and on technical and less radical forms of innovations.
The literature presents few frameworks or
classifications to illustrate dimensions of innovations.
As the literature on SLI dimensions is limited, this
review also includes frameworks identified in
sustainable innovation and logistics innovation
literature. Existing frameworks sometimes include
synonyms and different terms for the same dimension.
A content analysis of the identified dimensions was
made in order to identify e.g. synonyms and overlaps.
A consolidation was then made in order to single out
nine distinct dimensions, which represent the least
common denominator according to extant literature.
Along the literature review, it was noted that some
dimensions of SLI should be classified along a scale,
whereas others have distinct steps or boxes. By a
bottom-up approach, it was then possible to identify
three areas in which the dimensions were grouped;
softness, extent of change and scope. They were
supposed to be distinct areas, which represent the
least common denominator according to extant
literature. Softness (our concept) is a common theme
with many names in literature. Extent of change and
scope were suggested e.g. in [2]. In order to provide a
comprehensive picture, the framework was also
illustrated graphically, see further Figure 1.
As it was important to classify SLIs in practice, the
empirical study was central. A first plan was to
conduct a multiple-case study [31]. Initial company
contacts made it clear that SLIs were seldom
described
in
written
material
(homepages,
sustainability reports) from the companies. Neither
was it plausible to conduct observations of the SLIs,
which in contrast with earlier research preferably
should be less technical (and therefore difficult to
observe). Interviews were however found to be the
core means of data collection, offering enough depth
and detail to make it possible to classify SLIs. In
order to expand SLIs and dimensions outside earlier
research, it was decided to address retailers. Retailers
play an important role in sustainability, are logisticsintensive and are often held responsible for the
actions of other supply chain actors e.g. suppliers
actions to increasing the sustainability of their
logistics systems. This is in line with an intensity
sampling logic and examples of good practice [20].
Furthermore they were partners in an ongoing
research project on sustainable logistics innovation,
which implied good access. As many SLIs
representing all dimensions were found, these three
retailers implied that saturation was perceived. The
retailers are large actors on the Swedish market. The
selection of respondents, including the sequence in
which to individually interview them, were decided
by each partner company representative, who was
well informed about the purpose of the interviews. An
overall picture was given by the first respondent, and
the following interviews focused more on specific
innovations. The respondents were perceived to be
experienced in SLI and showed understanding for the
questions during the nine interviews. The respondents
in each company are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Interviewed companies and respondents
Retailer
1

Brief
description
B2C, daily
groceries

2

B2B, office
supply

3

B2C,
food

non-

Respondents
Logistics
manager,
CSR/sustainability
manager,
Recycling
manager
Environmental/quality
manager,
Logistics
manager,
Transport
operation
manager,
Sales director
Supply chain manager,
Logistics
and
transportation manager

In line with the definition of Arlbjørn et al. [2], an
innovation is more than a new idea, as it also includes
the activities required to commercialize it. It was
expected that not all SLIs identified were
commercialized, but in order to qualify for this study,
they should be implemented at least in a smaller scale.
The data collection used an interview guide, based
upon the framework to strengthen construct validity
[31]. This interview guide was distributed prior to the
interview. All interviews were personal, taking place

3
at the premises of each retailer, and lasted between 50
and 90 minutes. They were initiated with each
respondent’s own description of implemented SLIs.
Thereafter each SLI was discussed along the nine
dimensions in the framework. Open-ended questions
were posed, hence scales or boxes were not
mentioned. Thereby empirical input to the
framework’s scales was expected. By systematically
going through the dimensions, respondents could
recall more SLIs, which were discussed. Both authors
participated in and took notes during the interviews.
The two interview note versions were consolidated to
ensure inter-rater reliability and sent to each
respondent for verification.
In the analysis phase, the verified interview notes
from respondents in the same company built up SLI
descriptions. The wish was not to capture the total
number of SLIs per company or quantify the
existence of certain SLIs, therefore the unit of
analysis was the different SLIs, not the companies.
Due to many SLIs found, those SLIs that were new to
the industry and hence more inspiring, and/or
displayed interesting classifications along the
dimensions, were selected to be presented in detail.
The SLIs were classified into the framework by the
researchers, using the scales and boxes from the
literature review. The experiences from this built up
the analysis in chapter 5, where the applicability to
classify each dimension in practice was discussed.
The reliability of the study was further ensured by
documenting coding, decisions, and questions in a
study protocol [inspired by 31]. Earlier versions of
this paper were sent to respondents for a second
verification, and were thereafter discussed during one
research and two practitioners’ conferences. This
resulted in a few changes regarding the empirical
descriptions, but not in the framework.
3

LITERATURE REVIEW:
DIMENSIONS OF SUSTAINABLE
LOGISTICS INNOVATION

This section is structured around three areas of SLI
dimensions; softness, extent of change and scope. The
included nine dimensions in each area are italicized in

Figure 1: A framework of dimensions to classify SLIs

Technological

Service

Product

Process

Organizational

Extent of change

Small input
(component)

Large input
(architectural)

Small output
(incremental)

Large output
(revolutionary)

Existing customer/user

New customer/user
New
offering

Existing
offering

Customized
offering

Standardized
offering

Scope

Companyinternal
Purchasing

Dyadic
relationship

Transport

Warehouse

Economical

Environmental

3.1
Softness
A large variety of different dimensions of innovation,
from hard - such as technology and products - to soft such as processes and organization, has been
identified in the literature. This area is labelled
softness. One way of classifying sustainable
innovation was applied by Hellström [13], using a
combination of “Schumpeterian” innovation forms:
new products, new methods of production, new
sources of supply, new markets, and new ways of
organizing. Another way was provided by Klewitz
and Hansen [17], into products (including services),
processes
(redesigning
particularly
logistics/
transportation processes into reduced energy and
waste) and organizational (reorganization of the
supply chain, new forms of management). Grawe et
al. [11] describe logistics innovation as either product
innovation or service innovation. In the review of the
logistics innovation literature, Grawe [10] put forward
technological product-oriented logistics innovations
such as EDI and RFID, and process-oriented logistics
innovations such as VMI and cross-docking.
Technological innovation often results in new
products or services, whereas the softer forms of
innovation focus on the process that improves
practices and performance [6]. Zailani et al. [30]

Supply chain
Production

Reverse log/
closed loop

Social

provided a more detailed classification of
technological aspects into information and
communication (e.g. transport management systems,
freight forwarding software), biological (e.g.
alternative fuel) and monitoring. Rossi et al. [22]
mentioned
process
innovations
(minimizing
environmental
impact)
and
product/service
innovations (more environmental-friendly logistics
services). Based on these findings within softness, one
can conclude that SLIs can span from technological,
product, service, process to organizational.
3.2
Extent of change
An innovation implies changes in several dimensions;
five dimensions are identified for SLIs. A first
dimension for classifying the extent of change is in
input. Hellström [13] found in his study that
environmental innovations range from component
innovation, which occurs when small input, a small
module or a limited part of the system is changed
while the overall system remains, to architectural
innovation, which implies so large input changes that
the whole system is re-designed. A second dimension
to classify extent of change is in output, where output
is related to improved performance and how many
terms of sustaining and disruptive innovations;
sustaining innovations improve e.g. the performance
of established products or services, whereas disruptive
innovations consist of e.g. very different products or
services that may undermine established ones.
Similarly, Tidd et al. [25] refer to this from small step
continuous innovations (which is common in
processes) to erratic transformational innovations (so
far-reaching that they change the very functioning of
society). Jacoby and Rodriquez [15] suggest more
detailed dimensions to classify output and include the
customer or other user (could be internal users or
suppliers) and the offering. Incremental innovation
implies existing offering and existing customer/user;
evolutionary innovation consists of new offering and
existing customer/user, or of existing offering and
new customer/user; and revolutionary innovation
involves new offering and customer/user. In line with
this, Grawe [10] states that incremental/exploitative
innovations are designed to meet the needs of existing
customers, while radical/exploratory ones are
designed to meet the needs of new customers. Also
Arlbjørn et al. [2] distinguished between incremental
and radical innovation. Thus, a third dimension is that
the customer/user could be either existing or new. The
same literature also indicates a fourth dimension
based on the type of offerings: existing offering versus
new offering. A fifth dimension was suggested by da
Mota Pedrosa et al. [7], distinguishing the extent the
innovation is developed based on one customer’s
needs as customized or for all customers’ needs as
standardized.
3.3
Scope
The scope of an SLI can imply three different
dimensions. First, it is related to how many actors are
involved in implementing the SLI [2]. It can then span
from company-internal operations, but as companies
may not have all necessary resources to innovate, they
need to find innovation capabilities outside their own
organization e.g. at suppliers [9]. Therefore dyadic
relationships (including the innovating company and
its supplier or customer) can be needed, or even
supply chains (three or more organizations involved
[3, 8, 22]). The scope of an innovation could therefore
range
from
company-internal,
via
dyadic
relationships to supply chains. A second dimension to
classify scope is in which logistics activities SLIs can
exist; in purchasing, transportation, warehouse,
production, and reverse logistics [4, 27]. Often the
focus is on transport; however, Jensen et al. [16]
exemplify green supply chain innovations in reverse
logistics. In a food supply chain, waste from the
retailer, instead of being destructed, was transformed
to a value by introducing a biogas manufacturer that
used the reverse flow from the bakery as input to
manufacturing. This was done after the bakery took
this initiative and involved other supply chain actors.

5
Thus, reverse logistics was expanded to a closed-loop
supply chain. A third intuitive dimension of
describing the scope of sustainable logistics
innovations would be to distinguish between the
sustainability dimensions: economical, environmental,
and social. Several studies [23, 26] noticed a focus on
the environmental dimension in sustainability
logistics research. By adding this dimension the need
for addressing SLIs outside common limitations,
hereby emphasizing social sustainability, is further
addressed.
4

ILLUSTRATING AND
CLASSIFYING SLIS

It was interesting to find different SLIs, which
verified that companies with good practices had been
selected. Five SLIs were selected to be presented in
detail and classified in the framework.
Proactive/forced transport planning
4.1
Proactive and forced transport planning is used by one
retailer. As one important KPI is high fill rate in the
trucks, innovative practices and actions had to be
taken to improve fill rates. The centralized transport
planning works proactively with levelling out and
moving delivered volumes to the stores between
weekdays, resulting in a significantly improved fill
rate. This implied that the store may have to wait an
extra day for the goods, or receive them one day
earlier. Forced methods are also used, through which
the transport planning fill up available space in the
trucks with products with high turnover rates (e,g.
toilet paper, mineral water), even if those products
were not ordered, or ordered in smaller volumes by
the store.
This SLI can be classified in terms of softness as
having a strong focus on improved processes. It is
also an organizational change, as the decisions to
determine when certain goods should be delivered, are
moved from the stores to the central transport
planning function. The change in terms of input is
small, as some new decision rules are added as a
component to the planning process for the central
planner, whereas the change in output, in terms of
reduced environmental emissions from the transport
operations, is fairly large as fewer vehicles with high
fill rate are operating. Furthermore output is assessed
by classifying customer and offering. Existing
customers are addressed and the existing offering –
the delivery to the store – is changed in terms of
volume and timing. This is connected with
incremental to evolutionary output according to
Jacoby and Rodriguez [14]. Furthermore, the SLI is
standardized, addressing all customers or stores. This
SLI affects the dyadic relation between the central
transport planning function which implemented the
innovation, and the stores that receive its
improvements environmentally in terms of reduced
emissions. The classification of this SLI, along the
framework dimensions, is shown with a (blue) square
in Figure 2.
4.2
Small order calculator
Customers of one retailer are given the possibility to
make more aware decisions that affect their
sustainable purchasing behaviour. The small order
calculator is a pedagogical tool developed to assist
customers’ purchasing behavior towards not buying
too small, frequent volumes. During purchasing, it
schematically shows the different types of costs both
for the customer, such as administrative and invoice
handling costs, and for the retailer, such as picking
and transportation costs. It also shows the
sustainability consequences for both partners. This
tool has a “hard stop”, implying that too small orders
are denied and must be paused until additional orders
come from that customer, and a “soft stop”, which
gives information about the costs and environmental
effects and recommends the customer to refrain that
purchase. It has “opened the eyes” of customers.
Based upon guidance from the retailer, customers
(who often are large organizations with many possible
purchasing units) can, on a central level, decide the
limits for and hence customize their own soft and hard
stops. This SLI implies a development in the opposite
direction than the remaining office supply industry, in
which free over-night delivery of extremely small
orders is praxis.
The softness of this SLI is a service to the
customers. It is implemented as a component in the
existing order systems, therefore is input is small. For
its extent of change in output it has a large potential to
consolidate many small orders into larger dispatches
and reduce the need for transportation, but the
possibilities lie first within the use and behavior of
customers. Second, there are possibilities for the
retailer to learn what triggers different customers’
behavior, which in turn could affect the way the tool
is developed and improved. It is directed towards all
existing customers, but has a potential to attract new
customers as it deviates from the remaining industry.
It is a standardized solution, but its details can be
customized to the customer’s own limits for soft and
hard stops. For this SLI to function, it is implemented
in a dyadic relationship; the customer is dependent on
the information from the retailer, and the retailer is
dependent on the customer’s actions. Also, in the
development of the tool, competency and experiences
from both customers and retailer were needed to
decide on involved parameters and schematic values
for those parameters. This SLI is classified as a
purchasing tool, taking place in the purchasing
activity of the retailer’s customers. The ambition is to
both save costs and to save the environment (with

decreased transportation), hence it affects both
economic and environmental sustainability. The
classification of this SLI, along the framework
dimensions, is shown with a (red) circle in Figure 2.
4.3
Height adjustment of primary packaging
This retailer has a very large range of products, with
product sizes that differ significantly. Customers’
orders of different products vary, and as this retailer
had just two standardized sizes (different bottom
areas) of primary packaging, the fill rate in the
package varied significantly. Now, the innovative,
highly automatized packaging equipment used,
finishes each picked order by automatically measuring
the height of the goods in each package. Then it
adjusts the height of the package, cuts is off and folds
it close to the height of the goods. This ensures a very
high fill rate in the primary package, which in turn,
results in a higher fill rate on the pallet, in the dispatch
area and in the trucks.
This SLI is in terms of softness a technical
innovation that is starting to spread over the world,
and this retailer is among the first to use it in Sweden.
A part/component of the input is changed i.e., adding
one, although very complex, packaging machine as
the final stage in the order picking process. As this
has resulted in an output change with as much as 40%
reductions in the charged transportation volumes,
output is classified as evolutionary. It is applied for
existing customers, close to the existing offering
however with a smaller packaging. The SLI is
standardized and the same for all customers, even if
each customer gets a customized packaging.
Therefore it is classified between standardized and
customized. This SLI is implemented on companyinternal basis. The change occurs in the warehouse
activity, but the effects appear mainly in transport.
Short-term, under the current contract and charging
model with the LSP, this SLI has implied a lot of
economic gains for the retailer; the pay-back time for
this SLI was short. Long-term economic gains will be
related to coming LSP contracts, as the LSP becomes
aware about the new structure of the goods from the
retailer. The potential environmental gains are large,
but dependent on whether the LSPs manage to fill up
the reduced volumes with goods from other
customers. Furthermore, social gains, such as more
compact packages and easier handling, exist in terms
of improved work environment and decreased risk of
injuries. The classification of this SLI, along the
framework dimensions, is shown with a (green)
triangle in Figure 2.
4.4
Silent night delivery
For stores in large city centres, there are difficulties
regarding delivering on time during the day due to
congestions. One retailer has participated in the
development of an SLI designed to handling this
community, and the truck manufacturer, in order to
enable silent night deliveries in cities. The truck
recognizes by GPS if it is in a quiet zone or not, then
it turns the radio off and minimizes the beeping noise
when reversing. This retailer has actively participated
in developing, adapting, and testing handling
equipment to fit with the quiet vehicles, such as quiet
forklifts and ramps. The driver can lock up the store’s
warehouse and unload in the accurate temperature
zones, so the goods are available to sell the next
morning. A unique aspect of this SLI is the holistic
concept of identifying all components with disturbing
noises. It is directed towards safer city transportation,
and less congestion, which is of relevance in a larger
city (where night activity is more likely to be
accepted).
In terms of softness, there is a strong focus on
technology in this SLI. It is also an organizational SLI
as it affects the organization with dispatch and goods
reception at other times. As nightly transportation is
often prohibited, new temporary contracts have to be
negotiated with the community to test the SLI, after
which it may become permanent. The extent of
change in input is large; it has required the design of a
totally new delivery system. The extent of change in
output, measured as higher average driving speed and
lower emissions is promising, however difficult to
classify as it yet is implemented in a small scale. This
retailer has operations in many countries with large
cities, where legislation may be more allowing. This
SLI is directed towards existing customers or stores.
At the same time it is a new offering for the stores.
Using the typology of Jacoby and Rodriguez [14],
existing customers and a new offering imply
evolutionary output. It is a customized offering,
customized for those customers/stores that are located
in congested city centres. The scope of this SLI is
supply chain; it is implemented by the retailer, one
LSP and several stores. The scope is also classified as
affecting transport and warehousing of the stores. It
affects the entire triple bottom line, including
economic effects from improved service and reduced
driving time and cost, reduced emissions, and
undisturbed local inhabitants. The classification of
this SLI is shown with a (yellow) star in Figure 2.
4.5
Closed loop waste management
One retailer has developed a new waste management
system for their left-over bake-off bread from stores.

7
Instead of sending away the outdated bread locally in
each store for disposal/destruction, the bread is taken
back to the distribution center, in a reverse logistics
flow with the emptied distribution vehicles. The bread
is then sold to a new customer, an ethanol
manufacturer, which uses organic material as raw
material for production. This implies that waste has
gone from a cost to become a revenue-generating
asset. The ethanol producer complements the
retailer’s supply chain as a new actor and closes the
supply chain into a loop. In order to close the supply
chain into a loop, the retailer has had to acquire
certain types of bags to handle the bread, and develop
new routines and processes for handling the bread
during transport.
Softness-wise, this SLI builds upon a technological
innovation that makes it possible to use organic
material as an input in ethanol production. In order to
become closed loop waste management, it has also
required developed processes in the stores as well as
during transport. The extent of change in input is seen
as large and architectural, as this SLI has required
designing a new waste management system. Output
should be related to how many can benefit from
improved sustainability performance. This is again
more difficult to classify; it has a large potential in
reducing waste and emissions. However output is a bit
de-graded as bake-off bread is a small share of the
assortment. It introduces a completely new customer,
and therefore, the offering is highly customized.
According to the Jacoby and Rodriguez [14] typology,
this SLI therefore has the potential to imply
revolutionary output. This SLI is taking place with a
supply chain scope and impacts reverse
logistics/closed loop supply chain. It has good
economic effects, as new revenues are generated from
the
ethanol
manufacturer
and
costs
for
disposal/destruction of bread are not needed anymore.
Furthermore the empty return transports imply no
additional cost. Environmental sustainability is
generated by not disposing food and instead recycling
it as a renewable fuel. The classification of this SLI,
along the framework dimensions, is shown with a
(grey) cloud in Figure 2.
4.6
The SLIs classified in the framework
Figure 2 illustrates suggestions how to classify the

Figure 2: Five SLIs classified in the framework

Technological

Service

Product

Process

Organizational

Extent of change

Small input
(component)

Large input
(architectural)

Small output
(incremental)

Large output
(revolutionary)
New customer/user

Existing customer/user

New
offering

Existing
offering

Customized
offering

Standardized
offering

Dyadic
relationship

Scope

Companyinternal
Purchasing

Transport

Warehouse

Economical

Environmental

Proactive/forced transport planning
Height adjustment of primary packaging

Supply chain
Production

Reverse log/
closed loop

Social
Small order calculator
Silent night distribution

Closed loop waste management

5

EVALUATING THE APPLICABILITY
OF THE SLI FRAMEWORK

This chapter evaluates the applicability of the
framework to classify SLIs in three areas.
5.1
Classifying softness
Softness was about classifying each SLI into boxes as
technological, product,
service, process
or
organizational, which was possible to do. It is also
noted that some SLIs tick two boxes within the same
dimension; closed loop waste management was both
technological and process, and proactive/forced
transport planning was both process and
organizational. One lesson learned is therefore that
even if boxes are identified, more than one box may
be needed to classify the softness of a certain SLI.
Even if many SLIs identified are technological, in line
with the statements of Busse and Wallenburg [5] and

Rossi et al. [22], a number of complementing SLIs
were found along the dimensions. Several interesting
SLIs put forward in the empirical findings were
found; in terms of softness they relate to processes
(such as closed loop waste management), as well as
organization (silent night distribution). No productrelated SLIs are found, which should be a sign of the
service/processual character of logistics, and
completely in line with Chapman et al. [6]. It is worth
mentioning that during the interviews, all retailers
brought up the fact that their innovation efforts
outside logistics, are largely directed towards product
innovation.
5.2
Classifying extent of change
Extent of change is a complex area consisting of five
dimensions: input, output, customer, existing/new
offerings, and standardized/customized offering. The
logistics innovation by Busse and Wallenburg [5].
However both silent night delivery and closed loop
waste management build upon input changes more in
line with what Hellström [13] calls architectural input.
Classifying the input to an SLI was straight-forward
to do, as the respondents were able to describe input
well. In the use of silent night delivery and closed
loop waste management, large change in outputs are
noted in line with what Jacoby and Rodriguez [15]
call evolutionary innovations. Output builds upon
knowledge or measurements of sustainability
performance. This was seldom known by the
respondents. This calls for a stronger routine in
following up sustainability performance, related to
certain SLIs. Output is also a very relative dimension
to classify. A large improvement of sustainability
performance can occur in a very limited area, such as
in a pilot project (silent night delivery) or in a part of
an assortment (closed loop waste management).
Related to the notion that SLIs can be just new to the
firm [17] and that logistics innovation often are not
commercialized, SLIs can be internal and local and
therefore imply a smaller extent of change in output.
Furthermore output should be linked to a time
dimension, where output may increase over time as
the SLI is up-scaled. For these reasons, extent of
change in output was a difficult dimension to classify.
It is also obvious from the literature review that many
studies have tried to capture extent of change in
output, indicating that it is challenging.
A third dimension is which customer or user to
address. Flint et al. [8] emphasize the importance of
involving customers, but do not distinguish between
existing and new customers. The studied retailers
indicate that it is most common to have SLIs towards
existing customers and users, which is interesting to
discuss further. One explanation to this tendency
could be that logistics has an internal approach, in line
with Chapman et al. [6], and therefore is aimed for
existing users. Another explanation could be that a
limited amount of customers are interested in
sustainable logistics services, and thus, might be an
up-and-coming customer segment. A third
explanation is that companies have not yet noticed the
support these customers can bring to the development
process of innovations. The exception to the rule is
closed loop waste management, which required a
completely new type of customer, an ethanol
producer. Enabled by this new customer, this SLI
differs from most other SLIs in terms of other
dimensions. This indicates the large potential in
addressing new customers. This is a straight-forward
dimension to classify. The dimension of offering is
found along a scale from existing to new. With
existing customers, evolutionary innovations are most
common, per Jacoby and Rodriguez [15], and it is not
possible to achieve revolutionary innovations. It
seems that it takes a SLI with a new customer, closed

9
loop waste management, to create revolutionary
innovations. This is in line with Grawe [10], as
incremental changes, like the small input changes
often are designed to meet the needs of existing
customers and users. The difficulty to classify output
may be a reason why Jacoby and Rodriguez [15]
suggested capturing output as the newness of the
customer combined with the newness of the offering,
both of which were easier to classify. Finally, in the
dimension of standardized to customized offerings,
the SLIs are distributed along a scale, as suggested by
da Mota Pedrosa et al. [7]. The existence of
customized SLIs gives hope that also new customers
will be addressed in the future, enabling revolutionary
SLIs. Also offering was possible to classify, based
upon information from the respondents.
5.3
Classifying scope
Classifying scope in boxes from internal to supply
chain, in line with Björklund and Forslund [3], was
another straight-forward dimension to classify and all
scopes were found in the SLIs studied. It is interesting
to note that many SLIs require at least a dyadic scope.
Here examples of retailers involving LSPs as
suppliers in the development of SLIs are found (e.g.
in silent night delivery), in line with the suggestions
by Fossas-Olalla et al. [9]. Closed loop waste
management is an SLI that has a supply chain scope.
Such SLIs contribute to a higher level of integration
in supply chains, encouraged by general supply chain
management literature. The common belief that SLIs
activity-wise occur in transportation [18] is somehow
contradicted as examples in other logistics activities,
such as purchasing (small order calculator),
warehousing (height adjustment of primary
packaging), and reverse logistics (closed loop waste
management) are found. As expected, no productionrelated SLIs were found among the retailers. Height
adjustment of primary packaging affected both
transport and warehousing, indicating that more than
one box is needed to fully classify scope.
Additionally, in transportation, new innovative
practices such as silent night deliveries and
proactive/forced transport planning are seen.
Furthermore, the development towards closed loop
supply chains, as discussed by Jensen et al. [16],
shows a lot of promise. This is a type of SLI that
brings large improvements both to logistics and
sustainability and can be expected to increase in the
future.
Scope can also be addressed in terms of the triple
bottom line [26]. Almost all SLIs are ticking the
economic and environmental boxes, but it is more
difficult to find examples of social ones. The
respondents had a hard time trying to identify the
social dimension, and even more so when trying to
measure and evaluate the extent of change in this
dimension. A smaller aptitude to realize the social
area for development. One explanation is that research
has provided fewer guiding examples [26]. Good
examples of SLIs covering the complete triple bottom
line are silent night delivery and height adjustment of
primary packaging. There may, however, be SLIs that
affect the social dimension, even if they were not
mentioned by the respondents. As good examples are
few in this field, some SLIs with potential social
implications not identified by the respondents are
presented. For example, the proactive/forced transport
planning could also imply social sustainability in the
shape of work environment, as the store knows that
full trucks will arrive each time, making it easier to
estimate and plan the goods reception and the staff
needed. Using food waste has social aspects, and one
can question the use of food as fuel.
5.4

The applicability of the framework
to classify and expand SLIs
The framework was applicable in illustrating the
various SLI dimensions, and all dimensions, with the
exception for extent of change in output, were
possible to classify based upon qualitative interviews.
Extent of change in output either required
complementing
quantitative
measurement
information, or could be handled as a combination of
the newness of customer and offering. The empirical
study did not add new dimensions to classify SLIs,
nor any new suggestions for scales or boxes to
classify the dimensions. Therefore the framework
seems to fulfil its purpose in its current design.
The framework provided an overview of the
location of SLIs, such as that most SLIs are directed
towards existing customers. It has also an important
property in highlighting gaps where very few SLIs
exist. That can pose important why-questions. Hence
it can also be used to develop and expand new SLIs
that differ in several dimensions from other SLIs. The
framework does not only offer practitioners and
researchers an understanding of the multidimensional
nature of SLIs, but it can also challenge the further
expansion of SLIs by adding new dimensions and
raising new questions to address: How could this
innovation be designed to be even more
revolutionary? Can it be designed in the form of new
offerings? How can it be designed to also attract new
customers? The logistics focus implies that
commercializing [2] the SLIs is less common, but that
could be a possibility. Furthermore, by considering
the triple bottom line, companies can gain inspiration
and insights to also consider their SLI in the light of
the social dimension, often lacking in both research
and practice. These aspects could guide companies
and the framework can, thereby, be an important tool
for companies that wish to expand SLIs in order to
improve their sustainable logistics.

In a practical situation, it is possible to use the
framework to systematically expand SLIs along the
dimensions of the framework. An SLI should have a
certain type of softness. Its extent of change could be
captured along five dimensions. The scope is
especially important and adds to the special character
of SLIs. It highlights how many actors that are
involved and in which logistics activities it can occur.
If a qualifier for a SLI would be to cover the triple
bottom line, many of the retailers’ SLIs would be
excluded. As every step towards sustainability is
important, it is suggested that SLIs that address
environmental or social together with economical
sustainability are included. When this research area
evolves, which should be in line with the suggestions
of Rajkumar et al. [21], it might be more suitable to
limit the definition to only include innovations that
cover the triple bottom line. Overall the suggestion
that SLIs should be new to the firm [17] implied that a
large number of SLIs were possible to illustrate. This
is important in terms of not discouraging retailers to
have too high demands on their innovativeness (such
as if SLIs had to be new to the industry). In practice
and on a societal level, every step in every company
towards improved sustainability is important. The
definition aspect, if SLIs should be new to the
industry or to the firm (even if it can be seen as less
innovative and continuous improvement of
sustainable logistics by a mature company), must not
be hindering. Overall, SLI is an area of concern for
companies, confirming the studies by Abbasi and
Nilsson [1] and Russo Spena and de Chiara [23].
6

CONCLUSIONS, IMPLICATIONS AND
FURTHER RESEARCH

In order to inspire researchers and practitioners to
expand their mindset when addressing sustainable
logistics, the purpose of this paper is to develop a
framework for classifying sustainable logistics
innovations, and by classifying some SLIs evaluating
the applicability of the framework. A framework
expanding the limitations from earlier research,
consisting of three areas and nine dimensions, was
built up from literature. By studying three retailers, a
number of SLIs were identified, and thereafter
classified by the authors applying the developed
framework. It was found that the SLIs identified were
possible to classify along all dimensions, with some
difficulties in extent of change in output based upon
qualitative interviews. The framework with its scales
and classifications are contributions to literature, not
only on SLIs but also on sustainable logistics in
general as the qualifying newness of an SLI varies.
The study has implications for research, as it has
bridged the research streams of logistics and
innovation in accordance with the suggestions of
Arlbjørn et al. [2], areas with large research needs. It
interviews: by pushing the respondents and
suggesting all nine dimensions, they were made
conscious, and were able to reflect and see their work
in a new light. Practical implications occur also for
other practitioners who can become aware of the
multidimensional nature of SLIs. Applying the
framework (shown in Figure 1), SLIs can be
understood in a more concrete and applicable way,
which can inspire managers to expand their efforts
towards sustainable logistics. For practitioners who
already have implemented SLIs, one recommendation
is to apply the framework in order to achieve a
holistic overview of existing SLIs, and an
understanding of the gaps in dimensions not covered,
which signals development potentials. This results in
an overview similar to the one illustrated in Figure 2,
but made from one company’s perspective instead.
This structured mapping can also facilitate
benchmarking between similar companies within, for
example, the same group of companies. Another
recommendation is to apply the framework to expand
and further develop an existing SLI, for example
towards customized offerings for standardized SLIs or
towards new customers for SLIs targeting existing
customers, In this paper, classification is carried out
applying the framework “from top to bottom”, starting
with softness and ending with scope. However,
practitioners are recommended to start with the
dimension that is the easiest to map with regard to that
specific SLI. Not either is it necessary to classify all
dimensions of an SLI, thus it is possible to only use
parts of the framework. However, the more
dimensions
included,
the
more
covering
understanding will be gained.
As practitioners have not yet tested to classify SLIs
in the framework, the validation of its practical
applicability is a first suggestion for further research.
This could possibly be done as case studies or as a
Delphi study. This study was designed to encompass
retailers. As LSPs have been addressed previously,
manufacturers could be a logical next step to address,
which may lead to additional dimensions in the
framework and more inspiring examples of SLIs. The
possibility to classify the dimension extent of change
in output could also need additional research using
deeper qualitative methodology. This study was
designed to focus on implemented innovations.
Therefore, the possible dimension “rate of adoption”
was excluded. Schleper and Busse [24] describe five
innovation-related qualities that determine the rate of
adoption: relative advantage (if potential adopters
perceive the innovation to be superior to its present
alternatives); compatibility (if potential adopters find
the innovation to fit well, considering the present
context in terms of values, coexisting technologies,
and past experiences); trialability (if potential
adopters have the opportunity to test the innovation,
learn its particular advantages, and build confidence

11
for the new technology or process); observability (the
transparency and accessibility of the effects of the
innovation); and complexity (the ease of potential
adopters to understand and use the innovation). If a
company would like to apply the framework towards
innovation customers, these qualities could form an
additional area including one dimension (with five
boxes) to classify rate of adoption. During the
interviews, some examples of less successful tests or
not yet implemented ideas were mentioned, and were
consequently excluded from this paper. However,
further research analyzing these kinds of tests and
ideas in the light of the framework provided by
Schleper and Busse [24] could provide understanding
about the largest hindering factors in adopting SLIs. A
last suggestion for continued research, is a larger scale
survey study with the purpose to assess the existence
of various SLIs in different companies and along
different dimensions.