growing environmental consciousness by developing ‘environmental friendly’ products
(Kohl, 1990). Interestingly, however, there seems to exist a cognitive dissonance as only a
few ‘green’ products have been successful so far (Reitman, 1992) despite the vast majority
of consumers reporting that their purchases were influenced by environmental concerns
(Chase and Smith, 1992). Little empirical evidence exists as to translating those proenvironmental attitudes and beliefs into environmentally conscious behavior (Crane, 2000)
such as green buying and recycling (Hume, 1991). Considering the issue in mind, this paper
ventures to propose a refined integrated framework regarding consumer green purchasing
behavior index. This framework/index is expected to provide clear direction to the
researchers and practitioners about some most vital/significant issues of green consumer
behavior. The future researchers in the field may consider this framework in their further
empirical studies to test its applicability in their research context.
1. Pro-environmental consumer behavior
It is notable that pro-environmental behaviors differ from general purchase-related
consumer behaviors. General purchase behavior is driven by an assessment of its benefits
and costs that are of immediate relevance solely to the individual consumer performing the
behavior. By contrast, environmentally conscious behavior is unlikely to deliver instant
personal gain or gratification, but rather a future-oriented outcome (e.g. cleaner
environment) that often benefits society as a whole (Mc Carty and Shrum, 2001; Kim and
Choi, 2005). However, during the very recent periods, it can be observed that the current
environmental dreadful conditions are ever more menacing consumer health and wellbeing
globally. Therefore, consumers are becoming more sensitive in their environmental
attitudes, preferences and purchases (Sarigollu, 2009). Over the past few decades,
environmental problems and issues have been extensively recognized and discussed. A
large number of respondents all over the world state that they are concerned or very
concerned with environmental problems (Dunlap and Mertig, 1995; Diekmann and
Franzen, 1999). Customers are ever more aware of the seriousness of the environmental
degradation, resulting more ecologically consciousness and desire to purchase eco-friendly
products and services, favoring businesses that prefer environmental practice (Roberts,
1996; Kalafatis et al., 1999; Laroche et al., 2001).
Accordingly, academic research in this area has centered on the identification of consumer
motivation underlying pro-environmental behaviors (e.g. Bagozzi and Dabholkar, 1994;
Lee and Holden, 1999) and the explanation of the relationship between cognitive or
motivational factors and environmentally conscious behavior (e.e., Dietz, Stern and
Guagnano, 1998; Karp, 1996; Mc Carty and Shrum, 1993 and 1994). Despite the continued
efforts, it is still difficult to predict consumers’ pro-environmental behavior. Over the last
30 years, many psychologists and sociologists have explored the roots of direct and indirect
environmental action. The answer to the questions of “Why do people act environmentally
friendly” and “What are the barriers to pro-environmental behavior?” is extremely
complex. Numerous theoretical frameworks have been developed to explain the gap
between the possession of environmental knowledge and environmental awareness, and
actually displaying pro-environmental behavior. For example, Dunlap and Mertig (1995),
Dunlap,Van Liere, Mertig and Jones (2000), Kaplan (2000) and Ali, Khan and Ahmed
(2011) reported that though a lot of people are aware of and concerned about environmental
issues, this does not always reflect in pro-environmental behavior. In this way, although,

many hundreds of studies have been done, no definite answers have been given yet
(Kollmus and Agyeman, 2002).
The following section discusses the different prior studies and theoretical frameworks
regarding the consumers’ green/environmental purchasing behaviour. The main goal will
be to develop an integrated framework and a hypothesized sustainability index. Kim and
Choi (2005) identified three factors that usually affect consumers’ pro-environmental
behavior. These three factors are collectivism, environmental concern and perceived
consumer effectiveness (PCE). Mostafa (2009) holds altruism, environmental concern,
environmental knowledge, skepticism towards environmental claims, environmental
attitudes to be the main factors that may affect consumers’ green purchasing behavior. In
addition, Ahmad and Juhdi (2008) notified that perception towards organic food, awareness
on government action and support, beliefs about product safety for use, belief about product
friendliness to environment, availability of product and product information are the most
influential factors that affect consumers’ pro-environmental behavior. Partially confirming
the view of Ahmad and Juhdi, Panni (2006) as well as Ismail and Panni (2008) notified that
availability of information on green products as well as the availability of such products
significantly influences consumers’ pro-environmental behavior. From these studies a
modified indexed has been created. The different issues/variables of the consumers’ green
purchasing behavior are going to be discussed one by one.
2. Environmental knowledge
Kempton et.al (1995) notified that most people do not know enough about environmental
issues to act in an environmentally responsible way. Environmental knowledge can be
defined as “a general knowledge of facts, concepts, and relationships concerning the natural
environment and its major ecosystems (Fryxell & Lo, 2003, p. 45). In other words,
environmental knowledge involves what people know about the environment, key
relationships leading to environmental aspects or impacts, an appreciation of “whole
systems”, and collective responsibilities necessary for sustainable development. Rokicka
(2002) found that attaining a high level of environmental knowledge produces much better
pro-environmental behavior. Concordantly, Mostafa (2009) found that environmental
knowledge has a significant impact on the consumers’ intention to buy green products. So
from the above discussion the first hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer behavior
variables can be developed:
H1: Environmental knowledge has a significant positive effect on the consumers’ green
purchasing behavior.
3. Altruism
Based on the view that altruism is a subset of pro-social behavior, Schwartz’ (1977) theory
of altruism suggests that pro-environmental behavior becomes more probable when an
individual is aware of harmful consequences to others and when that person takes
responsibility for changing the offending environmental condition. Vice versa, pointing to
the detrimental influence of individualism in this context, Borden and Francis (1978)
hypothesize that:
 Persons with a strong selfish and competitive orientation are less likely to act
ecologically;
 People who have satisfied their personal needs are more likely to act ecologically
because they have more resources (time, money and energy) to care about bigger, less
personal social and pro-environmental issues.
Relating back to Schwartz’ work, the study of Stern, Dietz & Kalof (1993) examined the
role that social altruism (concern for the welfare of others) and biospheric altruism (a
concern for the non-human elements of the environment) play in influencing green
behavior. The findings suggest that the two constructs positively influence consumers’
green behavior. In the same vein, Mostafa (2009) found that altruism has a significant
positive influence on the intention to buy green products. From the above discussions the
second hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer behavior variables can be developed:
H2: There is a positive relationship between altruism and consumers’ green purchasing
behavior.
4. Environmental awareness
Environmental awareness is defined as “knowing the impact of human behavior on the
environment”. Environmental awareness has both a cognitive, knowledge-based component
and an affective, perception based component (Kollmuss and Agyeman, p. 253). Panni
(2006) found, that the more the consumers are aware regarding the societal and
environmental issues the more they are involved in pro-social and pro-environmental
behavior. From the above discussion the third hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer
behavior variables can be developed:
H3: Environmental awareness is positively associated with consumers’ green purchasing
behavior.
5. Environmental concern and attitude
Fundamental to environmental research is an individual’s concern for the environment
(Hines et al., 1987). Based on the pioneering research of Dunlap and Van Liere (1978),
environmental concern is defined as a global attitude with indirect effects on behavior
through behavioral intention. Crosby, Gill and Taylor (1981) mentioned that environmental
concern is a strong attitude towards preserving the environment. Attitudes are defined as
the enduring positive or negative feeling about some person, object, or issue. In fact, it
refers to the information a person has about a person, object, or issue (Newhouse, 1991).
The social psychology literature on behavioral research has established attitudes as
important predictors of behavior, behavioral intention, and explanatory factors of variants
in individual behavior (Kotchen & Reiling, 2000). In many studies both these factors have
been found to be important/significant predictors of consumer pro-environmental behavior.
For example, an individual’s concern level as to environmental issues has been found to be
a useful predictor of environmentally conscious behavior, i.e. recycling behavior
(Arbuthnot and Ligg, 1975; Kellgren and Wood, 1986; Simmons and Widman, 1990) and
green buying behavior (Chan, 1996; Donation and Fitzgerald, 1992; Kerr, 1990; Ottman,
1993; Schlossberg, 1992). Environmental concern has been traditionally viewed as a unidimensional construct ranging from unconcerned about the environment at the low end to
concern at the high end, as measured by the new environmental paradigm (Milfont &
Duckitt, 2004). Academic studies examining environmental concern include that of
Fritzsche and Dueher (1982) who examined the effects of concern for the environment on
the choice of deodorant container and that of Kinnear and Raylor (1973) who examined the
effects of ecological concern on attitudes towards phosphates in laundry detergents. Other
studies include, for example, that of Prothero and Mc Donald (1992) examining green
cosmetics and toiletries and that of Barr, Ford and Gilg (2003) examining recycled
packaging. Seguin, Pelletier and Hunsley (1998) have argued that environmental concern
can have a significant bearing on the degree to which individuals are motivated to change
behavioral practices so as to attempt to alleviate the problem. In a number of studies,
environmental concern has been found to be a major determinant of buying organic and
green food (e.g. Grunert, 1993). Hines, Hungerford & Tomera (1987) argued that
environmental concern has a direct relationship with pro-environmental behavior.
Predictably, people’s level of environmental concern is linked to their interest in and
willingness to purchasing green products (Biswas, Liecata, Mckee, Pullig and Daughtridge,
2000; Mainieri, Barnett, Unipan and Oskamp, 1997; and Schwepker and Cornwell, 1991).
Mainieri et al. (1997) argued that consumers with a stronger concern for the environment
are more likely to purchase products as a result of their environmental claims than those
who are less concerned about the environmental issues. Kim and Choi (2005) found that
environmental concern directly influences green buying behavior. Similarly, many studies
have specifically focused on the relationship between environmental attitudes and
environmentally related behaviors. Consumer attitudes have also been used in past studies
to predict energy conservation and ecologically conscious purchase and use of products
(Mostafa, 2009). Kassarjian (1971) studied consumers’ reaction towards a gasoline that
reduced air pollution and found that attitude toward air pollution was the most important
variable in determining consumers’ behavior toward the product. In a study conducted in
Germany, Balderjahn (1988) found that a positive attitude toward ecologically conscious
living resulted in ecologically responsible buying and using of products, including the use
of automobiles. It also prompted consumers to publicly show environmental concern by
signing ecologically relevant petitions and supporting or joining an antipollution
organization. The usual findings reveal a strong association between environmental attitude
and ecological behavior (e.g. Lynne and Rola, 1988). However, a number of studies have
found either a moderate relationship between environmental attitude and ecological
behavior (e.g. Axelrod and Lehman, 1993 and Smith et.al, 1994) or a weak relationship
(e.g. Berger & Corbin, 1992). Beckford et al. (2010) and Cornelissen et al. (2008) also
found in their studies that environmental attitude has a significant impact on consumer
environmental/green purchasing behavior. Mostafa (2009) found that both environmental
concern and attitude have significant positive effect on the consumers’ intention to buy
green products. So from the above discussion the fourth hypothesis for a correlated set of
consumer behavior variables can be developed:
H4: Environmental concern and attitude positively influence consumers’ green purchasing
behavior.
6. Availability of product information and product availability and belief about
product safety for use
Empirical evidence shows that consumers’ difficulty in locating environmentally directed
products is partly due to a lack of information (Brown and Wahlers, 1998). Some studies
have identified that a lack of green and organic food availability in store is considered as
one of the barriers to consumer purchase (Byrne et.al, 1991; Davies, 1995). Availability
refers to the level of ease or difficulty to obtain or consume a specific product. Vermeir and
Verbeke (2004) argued that many consumers have motives to buy green products but it
does not translate in the purchasing behavior due to low availability. Mainieri et al. (1997)
also argued that the reason why the consumers’ environmental consciousness lagged behind
the pro-environmental behavior is the inadequate availability and marketing of the
environmental friendly products. Besides, it can be said that in order to contribute making
the consumers environmentally responsible, adequate availability of the product and the
existence of environmentally and socially responsible companies are required. On the other
hand, it should also be noted that the environmental claims have to be genuine and should
not create any confusion in order to motivate them towards environmental purchasing
behavior. Recently, Ismail and Panni (2008), Ismail, Panni and Talukder (2006) and Panni
(2006) confirmed that the availability of green products is necessary to make the consumers
involved in pro-social/pro-environmental behavior. However, when this information about
green/organic food becomes available, it usually turns into knowledge to the consumers. In
order to involve mass consumers in the green buying process, it is required to have a
massive promotional campaign on these products to illustrate their safety issues and health
friendly attributes to the consumers as numerous studies have found that belief about
product safety is an important factor to be involved in pro-environmental purchasing. Many
authors like Henson (1996), Gil et.al (2000), Canavari et.al (2003), Smed and Jensen
(2003), Pickett-Baker, Ozaki (2008) and Banyte, Brazioniene and Gadeikiene (2010)
notified that consumers’ willingness to pay for quality and safe/ environmental friendly
products may usually involve them in pro-environmental purchasing. Panni (2006) notified
that consumers are concerned and aware regarding different adulteration practices done by
the unethical marketers. Ahmad and Juhdi (2008) found that belief about product safety for
use has a significant positive impact on consumers’ intention to buy green and organic
products since one of the most common mentioned reasons for purchasing organic products
is that it is perceived as healthier than conventional alternatives (Chinnici et.al, 2002;
Harper and Makatouni, 2002), which in turn influences green buying behaviour. So from
the above discussion the fifth hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer behavior variables
can be developed:
H5: Availability of product information and belief about product safety for use has a
positive influence on consumers’ green purchasing behavior.
7. Perceived Consumer Effectiveness (PCE)
Perceived Consumer Effectiveness (PCE) refers to the extent to which individuals believe
that their actions make a difference in solving a problem (Ellen, Weiner and CobbWalgren, 1991). Accordingly, Kim and Choi (2005) argued, that individuals with a strong
belief that their environmentally conscious behavior will result in a positive outcome, are
more likely to engage in such behaviors in support of their concerns for the environment.
Hence, self-efficacy beliefs may influence the likelihood of performing green purchase
behavior. From the above discussion the sixth hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer
behavior variables can be developed:

H6: Perceived Consumer Effectiveness (PCE) has a positive association with consumers’
green purchasing behavior.
8. Collectivism
Individualistic or collectivistic orientations have been found to influence a variety of social
behaviours. Likewise, person-level tendencies of individualism or collectivism appeared to
influence their motivation to engage in environmentally conscious behaviours. McCarty
and Shrum (1994, 2001) found a positive impact of collectivism on consumer beliefs about
recycling and their recycling behaviour. This implies that collectivistic persons are more
likely to engage in recycling behaviours because they tend to be more co-operative, willing
to help others, and emphasize group goals over personal ones. By contrast, people with
individualistic tendencies tend to view recycling less important (McCarty and Shrum, 2001)
and are less likely to participate in behaviours for resource conservation (Dunlap and Van
Liere, 1984). Similar results were also found for ecological commitments (Li, 1997).
Confirming the findings of the aforementioned authors, Kim and Choi (2005) concluded
that collectivism has an influence on the consumers’ green buying behaviour. From the
above discussion the seventh hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer behavior variables
can be developed:
H7: Collectivism has a positive influence on consumers’ green purchasing behaviour.
9. Transparency/Fairness on Trade Practices:
In aspect of fair trade, AIM-the European Brands Association (2002) prepared a paper on
the fairness of trade in order to meet the consumers’ current and future needs and by its of
consumer rights and interests. According to AIM there are several categories of unfairness
which are as misleading practices, failure to provide material information to the consumers,
undue influence and complaint handling and after sales service.
According to Kaynak(1985); Quazi(2002) and Sherlaker (1999), the fairness on trade
practices construct which are also termed as the micro issues of consumerism consider
various exploitative business practices among which the mostly discussed issues are
misleading advertising, deceptive packaging, unfair pricing, customer care, product
adulteration, black marketing, etc.
Misleading Advertisement
Koslow (2000); and Maronick (1991) argued that deceptive or misleading advertising is or
should be legally defined as, “the standard that is generally relied on what a reasonable
consumer would take away from an advertisement under the circumstances.” Knauer
(1973) mentioned that Public Interest Representation, a public interest law group at
Georgetown University Law center, analyzed the documentation for 59 television ads and
found that 41 were not substantiated by data submitted to the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC). In the same literature it was mentioned that the U.S. National Business Councils’
recommendations were indirectly endorsed in a 1972 by the American Management
Association (AMA). According to AMA, “companies that desire a high degree of honesty,
that have clear-cut and definite objectives, that have communicated to their agency exactly

what they expect will no doubt have fewer problems if any, with the FTC consumers and its
sales objectives.”
According to Knauer (1973), the National Business Council’s advertising reported the
following issues: “Advertising should avoid the use of claims whose validity depends upon
fine interpretation of meaning. Furthermore it also stated that advertising shall not claim
nor promise by implication any product performance or characteristic which is not fully
supported by test or research data or other similar factual information and the test of
whether anything is permissible in advertising under the policy is to ask whether it is true,
believable and good taste”.
Attas (1999) argued in this context that an advertisement will be deemed misleading or
deceptive only if it is reasonable to expect that persons exposed to it, or those targeted by it,
would come to hold false beliefs as a result of exposure to it. The reasonable person would
be misled by the advertisement meaning that the probability that a consumer would be
misled by the advertisement is sufficiently high. This has sometimes been understood as the
statistical assertion that a sufficiently high percentage of the exposed consumers would be
misled by the advertisement. He further added that a misleading advertisement is one that
causes a distorted perception and for which the advertiser is considered responsible. It
could be that the consumer misled by an advertisement will be tempted to buy the
advertised product and in that way either getting less than he thought he would or paying
more than he should.
Deceptive Packaging
Attas(1999) argued that the term “deceptive” comes from to deceive which to intentionally
cause a person to hold false beliefs. The notion of deceit can be categorized in two aspects:
 Deceit can be non-verbal as well as verbal.
 Deception implies success in causing someone to hold a false belief. Deceit is an
outcome concept; it is necessary to look at the outcome of whether there would be deceived
person actually comes to hold false beliefs in order to determine whether or not deception
has taken place. Deceit is intentional; it is the purpose of the deceiver to cause another
person to hold false beliefs.
Whereas packaging refers to the term used for containers and wrapping materials that
protect, contain, identify, promote and facilitate the use of the product. While a label is an
informative tag, wrapper, or seal attached to the product or the products’ package (Mason,
Rath, Husted and Lynch, 1995). So the deceptive packaging can be termed as the
packaging which is used by the companies or marketers that will contain false identity,
faulty information and which will unfairly promote the products to the consumers. Faruque
(2003); and Mann and Thornton (1978) indicated deceptive packaging as one sort of
unscrupulous practice done by the marketers whereby the faulty product information or
misinformation is provided on the label or package in order to deceive consumers. In
respect of green issue/ green marketing deceptive packaging refers to the false and
misleading information about the greenness of the product on its label and package. The
common practices are false green/organic claim on its label/package, exaggerated green
claims on its label or package etc.

Customer care
Customer care is a very important issue for any business in satisfying their customers
because proper customer care can create an image to the customers as the ethical and social
responsible firm. Berkman and Gilson (1978); and French et.al. (1982) defined customer
care as the companies’ engagement in complaint handling and after sales service to the
customers.
Sherlaker (1999) mentioned that as a practical solution for establishing better rapport with
the consumer, it is suggested that every manufacturer, especially for consumer goods,
establish a consumer affairs cell (CAC). The main objectives of this cell would be to
become more responsive to the valid grievances of consumers with resolving customer
complaints promptly. Furthermore they should also act promptly in disseminating
consumer information; advising management on consumer issues especially relating to
green products; dealing with/providing liaison to outside consumer interest groups and also
to educate consumers about their rights and responsibilities. This can ultimately make the
consumers aware regarding the green issues, green products and green marketing in order
to involve them in responsible and green purchasing.
Product adulteration
This is one sort of malpractice done by the marketers whereby they mix artificial
substances in the product as well as offer the low-standard products to the consumers in
order to deceive them. In fact, product adulteration refers to one sort of malpractice done by
the marketers whereby the marketers debase the products by mixing inferior or spurior
ingredients (Samsad Dictionary, 2005). Memery et.al. (2005) mentioned the adulterated
food in which additives, preservatives, artificial colors or flavouring are applied. In respect
of green issues/marketing, product adulteration refers to the mixing of excessive
preservatives, additives or artificial color that usually enables the shoppers to present their
products to their customers as green products. However, these excessive additives are very
harmful for the consumers and usually spoil the natural substance of the products.
Black Marketing
Black Marketing is another sort of unfair business practice. Kaynak (1985), Quazi (2002),
and Sherlekar (1999) mentioned that different types of black marketing involves in short
weights and measures of products, deliberate stocking out of product or hoarding etc. In
respect of green marketing, the major concerns are deliberately stocking out of green,
natural and organic food in order to hike the price of such products etc.
Unfair Pricing/Price Sensitivity and Transparency in Pricing
Unfair pricing is also a burning consumerist issue. A variety of authors (French et.al., 1982;
Kaynak, 1985; Sherlekar, 1999; Lisa , 2004) discussed the topic of unfair pricing which
can be defined as charging either an excessive price compared to its original price or
charging fictitious pricing. Marketers have found, that even when consumers profess strong
support for environmental protection, they are still extremely price sensitive when it comes
to buying green (Mainieri et al. 1997). Indeed, the perception among Washington residents
that recycled-content products are more expensive created a barrier for them in purchasing
these products (Mc Kenzie-Mohr, 2000). These studies also reported, that in most of the
cases marketers usually try to charge excessive price for green products in an unjustified
and non transparent way. This may demotivate and discourage customers to be involved in
green purchasing behavior.
From different prior studies conducted by Uusitalo and Oksanen (2004); Carrigan and
Attalla (2001); Ismail and Panni (2008) and Panni (2006) it has been found that the more
the consumers will perceive that the firms are involving in unethical/unfair practices the
more they will feel discouraged to be involved in green and socially responsible
consumption. Numerous scholars claim that consumers’ black lash to environmental
marketing is due to false, unsubstantiated or exaggerated claims (Carlson, Stephen and
Kangun, 1993). Davis (1991) states that terms such as ‘biodegradable’, ‘recyclable’ and
‘environmentally friendly’ have been used by many firms for describing benefits, which
were unproven, inconclusive, or unrealistic. Calfee and Ringold (1988) argued that
consumers are by nature skeptical of environmental claims unless they have credible bases
for evaluating the claims. The majority of the studies argue that consumers’ skepticism
regarding the environmental claims as well as the lack of real existence of environmental
sound companies discourage them to become environmentally conscious or ethical
customers. The Environmental Research Association finds that many consumers are
dubious about the environmental claims of corporations and often see them as mere
gimmickry (Fierman, 1991; and Mirvis, 1994) which often prevents them from proenvironmental purchasing. A variety of polls and surveys indicate Americans’ distrust on
advertisement and labeling claims pertaining to the environment (Ellen, Wiener and CobbWalgren, 1991; Shrum, Mc Carty, Lowrey, 1995; Mc Kenzie-Mohr, 2000). In an
Advertising Age Poll, more than half of the respondents responded that they paid less
attention to environmental advertising claims because of overkill, and most respondents
reported that environmental claims were not particularly believable (Shrum et.al, 1995). A
Gallop Survey (1995) also reported that the majority of the consumers were found to be
environmentally conscious. However, it has been also found that the consumers’ distrust on
the environmental claims and the doubts about the existence of the environmental friendly
companies usually create a negative impact on the consumer pro-ethical or proenvironmental behavior (Ellen et.al, 1991; Mc Kenzie-Mohr, 2000; Shrum et.al, 1995; and
Papadopoulos et al., 2009). Catoiu, Vranceanu and Filip (2010) confirmed in an empirical
study that price fairness in business practices has a direct influence on perceived value and
on buying intentions. In other words we can say that the more the consumers will perceive
that firms are involved in fairness on trade practices/transparency in business practices the
more they will feel encouraged to be involved in green and socially responsible purchasing.
This is because the consumers usually become discouraged to be involved in green and
socially responsible purchasing if they are unable to make a pro-ethical choice. From the
above discussion the eighth hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer behavior variables
can be developed:
H8: Transparency/Fairness on business practices positively affects consumers’ green
purchasing behavior.
10. Demographic Factors
From different prior studies it can be concluded that demographic variables have a
significant impact on the consumers’ pro-environmental/green purchasing behavior. Harris
et.al (2000) notified that the environmental conscious consumers are white, female,
professional and younger. Kollmuss and Agyeman (2002) indicated the demographic
factors to be one of the most influencing factors in pro-environmental behavior. Hustad and
Pessemier (1973) found that women’s education level has to be high to become
consumerist/environmental conscious consumers. Webster (1975) also found that socially
conscious consumers typically are female. According to Knauer (1971), consumers who
most often report deception and misrepresentation are high income women. Ruiz, Arcas
and Cuestas (2001) argued that gender plays an important role to be consumerists and
environmental conscious consumers. Berkowitz and Lutterman (1968) and Bourgeois and
Barnes (1979) agree on the consumerists/environmental conscious consumers to be better
educated and younger. Berkowitz and Lutterman (1968) as well as Hustad and Pessemier
(1973) identified the education level as an important factor for the consumers to be
concerned with the consumerist/environmental issues. Barksdale and Darden (1972), in line
with Berkman and Gilson (1978) hold, that the individuals, who are most likely to express
consumerist views, are younger. Consumerists exhibit higher socio-economic profiles
(Anderson and Cunningham, 1972; Hustad and Pessemier, 1973; Kinnear et.al. 1974;
Bourgeois and Barnes,1979; Uusitalo and Oksanen(2004). Memery et.al. (2005) argued that
demographic characteristics including race/ethnicity should be considered as an important
factor when profiling consumerists and pro-environmental consumers. Panni (2006) found
that consumers’ pro-social or pro-ethical behaviors are heavily influenced by demographic
characteristics in terms of age, income level, education level and occupation.
From different prior studies (Panni, 2006 and Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002) it can be
concluded, that, if there are any different sorts of variables which are different in
types/categories of the independent variables, such variables are often termed as mediating
variables, which mediate between the independent and the dependent constructs. From the
above discussion the ninth hypothesis for a correlated set of consumer behavior variables
can be developed:
H9: Demographic variables play the role of a mediator between the dependent variable
(green consumer behavior index) and the independent variables (green consumer behavior
variables).
Synthesizing on the literature review, an integrated framework of variables explaining
green consumer behavior is depicted in figure no. 1.
Figure no. 1: Schematic Diagram of the Integrated Conceptual Framework
DEPENDENT
VARIABLE

Consumers’
Green
Purchasing
Behavior
(Green
Consumer
Behavior Index)

60

MEDIATING
VARIABLE

Demographic
variables
Age,
Gender,
Income level,
Education level,
Ethnicity,
Occupation

INDEPENDENT
VARIABLES









Environmental Knowledge
Altruism
Environmental Awareness
Environmental Concern and Attitude
Belief about Product Safety for Use and
Availability of Product Information and
Product Availability
Perceived Consumer Effectiveness
Collectivism
Transparency/Fairness on Trade Practices
Customer care
Product adulteration
Unfair pricing
Black marketing
Misleading Advertising
11. Result and discussion
As already mentioned, the conceptual framework of the paper is developed on the basis of
thoroughly researched secondary data, which has integrated the so far incoherent
frameworks as proposed by previous authors. In fact, during the extensive literature survey
it has been found that previous studies proposed different aspects/issues on the green
consumer behavior in a very scattered manner. For example, Kim and Choi (2005)
identified three factors that usually affect consumers’ pro-environmental behavior. These
three factors are collectivism, environmental concern and perceived consumer effectiveness
(PCE). Mostafa (2009) holds altruism, environmental concern, environmental knowledge,
skepticism towards environmental claims, environmental attitudes to be the main factors
that may affect consumers’ green purchasing behavior. In addition, Ahmad and Juhdi
(2008) noted that perception towards organic food, awareness on government action and
support, beliefs about product safety for use, belief about product friendliness to
environment, availability of product and product information are the most influential
factors that affect consumers’ pro-environmental behavior. Other than these, only a few
literatures in the body of knowledge (please refer to the demographic literatures and
hypothesis) tried to show and discuss the impact of demographic variables on consumers’
green purchasing behavior. All these issues are actually very much interrelated and are
required to be integrated to develop a more detail framework that will organize all the vital
issues/variables of green consumer behavior and define a comprehensive set of
hypothesized explanatory variables which this conceptual framework has addressed. This
has certainly closed the gap in the existing literature and the body of knowledge.
Conclusion
Based on a comprehensive literature review, this paper, innovatively, provides an integrated
and comprehensive set of hypothesized explanatory variables of green consumer behavior.
It is regarded as the basis for a consensus among the partners of the value chain for green
products on consumer behaviour in this sensitive field. Hence, this information is an
invaluable source which should inform marketing strategies and tactics of companies
operating in the green product business. Later research of the authors aims at explaining a
newly created sustainability index for green consumer behaviour (consisting of concrete
measures of green consumer behaviour) based on the explanatory consumer behaviour
related variables provided in this paper. This index creation and explanation can be
regarded as a contemporary longitudinal study as it validates previous research findings.
This inferential research will also elicit the weight of the respective independent variables.
Beyond consumer behaviour related variables, this further research of the authors will,
furthermore, embrace other value chain related factors which affect environmental
sustainability overall. These factors are suggested to be derived from concepts related to
food and drink safety, entrepreneurship, quality management and benchmarking, waste and
energy management, free trade, corporate culture, corporate social responsibility, green
marketing (i.e. use of additives and preservatives, ecological packaging, branding,
biodegradable/recyclable packaging) or sociological concepts such as culture and identity.
Summarizing, further research aims at providing valuable information of the value chain
for green products entailing a set of criteria that will be applied in order to quantify the
level of environmental sustainability actions taken within the green product business. In
doing so, in the later stages the authors will conduct empirical research to test the
hypothesized index developed from this study. The authors have planned to apply data and
methodological triangulation in their study in order to generate more valid and reliable
findings. Data triangulation will be used in order to have views from the consumers as well
as industrial experts and players. Methodological triangulation will be applied in order to
generate findings from both qualitative and quantitative study. Since from this paper it has
been found that there was a serious knowledge gap of having a proper comprehensive
integrated model (which this paper has tried to address) the authors will conduct a
qualitative study in the preliminary/earlier stage of their research in order to ensure and
confirm the appropriateness/suitability of their model. Then in the later stage of the
empirical study, a quantitative research study will be carried out to finally test and validate
the research model and the hypothesized index. Finally, the outcome of the empirical study
will be explained from the managerial point of view.

