Executive Summary
This paper presents the first prototype of a model of wellbeing. This model
is designed to support policy development and decisions in New Zealand by
providing a tool for thinking about changes in aspects of wellbeing including tradeoffs and synergies for policies. It does this by modelling the linkages between the
eleven aspects of wellbeing used by the OECD in their How’s Life? framework, in
combination with a small general equilibrium model and stock-and-flow equations.
A model of this nature is a new addition to the policy modelling toolkit.
It is clear that this model, perhaps more than most, has many flaws and unrealistic
assumptions. However, it is the first attempt at such a model, and its existence
has several uses. Firstly, it shows that such a model is possible, and with a level of
complexity that, if not low, is low enough to be manageable and no higher than
many CGE (computable general equilibirum) models used for policy purposes.
Secondly, it provides a basis for criticism and improvement. Third, despite its flaws,
it is useful for policy analysis as it provides a tool for thinking about the trade-offs
and synergies between different aspects of wellbeing and policy that currently
does not exist.
Given the prototype nature of the model described in this paper, there is clearly
room for significant further work. The model and the results it gives should undergo
serious critical analysis to understand how the model behaves, what assumptions
are critical, and where the model gives unrealistic and unhelpful results. These
results will help inform improvements to the model and where they will be most
important. Data will also be a challenge for this model, as it requires a large
number of parameters and initial values. Much of the data is available (with varying
quality), but sensitivity analysis will be an important part of using the model.
There is also much to learn about policy by applying the model. Without a model
of this type, higher order effects (particularly those in different policy areas to
the original) are very difficult to anticipate. This model allows those effects to be
recognised, as well as obtain some understanding of how significant they are. For
example, consider an increase in health spending by government. The model
results indicate a small negative effect on the natural environment. Tracing through
the model shows this is not spurious: more health spending results in better health
which results in higher productivity, higher productivity results in more consumption
and production which results in more pollution and therefore a poorer natural
environment. This is a chain of impacts that is too long for most people to perform
mentally without the aid of a model, but the consequences could be important.
The model can be used for both single policies and for policy packages. In the
case of policy packages, it can be used to see how the effects of different policies
balance each other out, and which policies should be included in a package. It
provides a consistent framework for policies from different fields, e.g. education
and health, to be compared with each other and in a broader way than tools such
as cost-benefit analysis allow. As well, policies can be chosen on their ability to
mitigate some of the undesirable trade-offs inherent in the choice of policies that
are the cornerstones of a package.

Introduction

How do we understand the synergies and trade-offs of a given policy on area
beyond that policy, such as the effect of housing on health and on income?
How do we choose between policies in completely different areas, such as an
education policy and a health policy? How do wellbeing outcomes change if the
government focusses on wellbeing rather than GDP? Treasury’s Living Standards
Framework provides one possible starting point, but it provides little assistance
tracing the many dependencies between policy areas. A model that includes those
dependencies could help.
The first prototype of the Living Standards Analysis Model (LSAM) described in this
paper is designed to do this. This model includes all eleven aspects of wellbeing
as described by the OECD’s How’s Life? framework and linkages between the
different aspects for a small open economy. Most models for studying wellbeing
only include one or two aspects, missing the rich set of interactions that can occur
with greater coverage. As an early prototype, this version of the model does have
many flaws and requires significant further development, but it forms a basis for
creating an improved model as well as providing some qualitatively useful results.

1.1 What is Wellbeing?
There are several different ways the term “wellbeing” is used. Often it is used
to refer to subjective wellbeing, which in turn can refer to positive and negative
affect1 , life evaluation (commonly measured as life satisfaction), or eudaimonia2 .
Sometimes is it used primarily in relation to health and particularly mental health.
It is also used in a more holistic way to cover the breadth of both objective and
subjective conditions that lead to what might be described as “the good life”. It is
in this last sense that wellbeing is used in this paper.
Traditionally, GDP has been used as a measure of wellbeing when comparing
countries, partially due to its standardised measurement and single value, and
partially due to the belief that income level is a good proxy for wellbeing. There
have been many challenges to the use of GDP for this purpose (for example
1

2

Positive and negative affect refers to experiences of (respectively) pleasant emotional states
such as joy or peace; and unpleasant emotional states such as fear or sadness
Eudaimonia relates to the sense of purpose or value in one’s life

WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

1

Nordhaus and Tobin, 1972; Waring and Steinem, 1988; and see Bergh, 2009 for a
brief review of the literature). In the last decade or so, the belief in income as a
good proxy for wellbeing has been increasingly challenged by a variety of authors,
and perhaps most prominently by Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi in their 2009 report to
the French president.
At an individual level, wellbeing encompasses the things an individual values as
contributing to their quality of life. This includes their material conditions such as
their financial wealth and their consumption, but it also includes things money can’t
always buy, such as good health, clean air, and quality friendships. Individuals will
value these things differently according to their preferences, which then makes it
difficult to come up with a single value-neutral number representing wellbeing.
It is also useful to think about the distinction between utility and capability. Both
are important. Utility can be described as the value we get from outcomes—how
much we can consume, how healthy we are, how many quality friendships we
have etc. The capability approach (as described by Sen in his body of work such
as (Sen, 1999) and (Sen, 2009)), is more about the process and choices available
to us, such as the freedom good health gives us to choose to earn more income
or to further our education. The capability approach highlights the importance of
the linkages between different aspects of wellbeing. The greater our capability, the
more opportunity we have to make choices that maximise our utility even if we
change our preferences.
At the societal level, we face the additional challenge of aggregation when attempting to understand wellbeing, and this, like combining different aspects of
well-being, is not value-neutral. Do we follow Rawls (1971), and take the wellbeing
of the worst-off member of the society as the representative wellbeing; or Bentham
(1789) considering the (additive) total of wellbeing of all members of society; or
something in-between (which can be described mathematically by the isoelastic
formulation); or something else altogether?
If wellbeing is considered in the sphere of public policy, it is also important to consider the role of government—another value judgement. Is the role of government
and public policy to “improve people’s lives, now and into the future” as suggested
by Karacaoglu (2015, p. 1)? Or is it much narrower, limited to the minimal state
providing basic protections against fraud, theft, and violence as described by
Nozick (1974)? In a democracy such as New Zealand, the answers to these
questions are determined by those in power with the consent of the population.

WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

2

1.2 Frameworks, Measurements, and Models
Much of the current effort studying wellbeing is in developing frameworks and
defining and measuring wellbeing. This has led to a proliferation of indexes,
many covering a similar set of aspects of wellbeing, but dividing it into different
categories and using different measures and weights. Each index is designed with
a different purpose in mind and makes different value judgement. No one measure
or framework is dominant yet.
Prominent frameworks by intergovernmental organisations include the OECD’s
How’s Life? framework and related Better Life Index (OECD, 2011; OECD, 2017),
the UNDP’s Human Development Index (UNDP, 1990), and measurements against
the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (UN, 2015). The World Bank uses
Genuine Savings (Hamilton, 2000, also known as Adjusted Net Savings), which
emphasises sustainability through measuring changes to capital stocks. Some
for-profit and many non-governmental organisations have developed their own
measures, including the Legatum Institute’s Prosperity Index (The Legatum Institute, 2016) and the New Economics Foundation’s Happy Planet Index (Abdallah
et al., 2009). There are also regular reports ranking the “best” cities to live in, such
as the Global Liveability Ranking (The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2016), and in
New Zealand The Treasury have used their Living Standards Framework (Gleisner,
Llewellyn-Fowler, and McAlister, 2011) as a qualitative tool for policy analysis.
There has also been significant econometric work looking at the interaction between (typically) two aspects of wellbeing at a time. This could be the interaction
between health and income (Karanikolos et al., 2016), or subjective wellbeing
and income (Layard, 2005), or education and social connection (Helliwell and
Putnam, 2007), for example. This type of work is highly important for identifying
the factors that contribute to different aspects of wellbeing and finding some of the
connections between those different aspects.
But measurement (and to a lesser degree regression) doesn’t let us experiment
with different settings and understand their interaction, and there is much less
literature on creating a model of wellbeing. Most of the current and historical
work is theoretical and only brings one or two aspects of wellbeing together, most
commonly growth or income and the environment. This includes applying viability
theory to explore the boundaries of sustainable satisficing in fisheries (Krawczyk
et al., 2013), Arrow et al’s work on “comprehensive consumption” (Arrow et al.,
2012; Arrow et al., 2013), “clean” and “dirty” technologies (Acemoglu et al., 2016),
and adapting growth theory to include the environment (Dasgupta and Heal, 1974).
In health economics, the Grossman model (Grossman, 1972) describes some of
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

3

the interaction between health and income. Karacaoglu (2015) pulls together some
of these theoretical strands of work to create a more comprehensive theoretical
model appropriate for a small open economy such as New Zealand; but this model
has not been implemented (and is not designed to be implemented) as a practical
tool for answering policy questions.

1.3 The Prototype Living Standards Framework Model

The prototype model described in this paper is unique, both in the holistic treatment
of wellbeing, and in its applied nature. It includes all eleven of the OECD’s How’s
Life? framework aspects of wellbeing; and is intended for implementation in a
computational form for use in policy analysis. As this prototype was developed
before the current version of the Treasurys Living Standards Framework, it does
not include a culture aspect of wellbeing, but this will be considered for future
versions of the model.
The purpose of this model is to support policy development and decisions in New
Zealand by providing a tool for thinking about changes in aspects of wellbeing
including trade-offs and synergies for policies. This means it must be able to
answer practical policy questions in a suitable timeframe. As a tool for thinking
it need not provide the “right answer”, but it should raise new questions, make
implicit assumptions explicit, allow the anticipation of otherwise unanticipated
consequences, and break down silos between different policy areas. As the
model is focussed on the trade-offs and synergies between the different aspects
of wellbeing, it must cover a significant breadth of subjects. To remain tractable
and simple enough to be useful, this breadth must come at the sacrifice of depth
and detail in any given area. As the model is intended for use in New Zealand, it
models a developed country that is geographically isolated and has a small, open
economy. The How’s Life? framework has been chosen for its full coverage of
all aspects of wellbeing and as an internationally-used measure that focusses on
wellbeing in developed countries.
In The Idea of Justice, Amartya Sen said “It is possible to be at once deeply
appreciative and seriously critical of a theory” (2009, p.58). This paper describes a
model that, as a prototype, has many flaws but provides a framework for improvement. One of the purposes of creating a prototype model is to discover flaws, and
to learn which are important. Another purpose is to provide something concrete
that can be criticised, and then use that criticism to improve future prototypes.
This paper is written in that spirit, and the author would appreciate constructive
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

4

feedback on this prototype model.

1.4 Model Overview
The model described in this paper is a top-down stock-and-flow model including a
basic general equilibrium open economy. Households experience eleven aspects
of wellbeing (corresponding to those in the OECD’s How’s Life? framework), and
there are multiple household types. Households can produce goods and services
at home, have them supplied by the government, or purchase them from firms.
Firms buy labour and capital from households for use in production, and can import
and export goods. The government taxes income and consumption, and uses
those funds to provide goods and services to households, pay interest on debt,
and invest in physical infrastructure.
This is a complex model. It aims to incorporate the major links between all aspects
of wellbeing, as well as the significant drivers of those aspects. As can be seen in
Figure 1, not every aspect of wellbeing is directly linked to every other aspect, but
they are far from independent from each other.

Many of the interactions between different aspects of wellbeing occur in the
“investment” equations of the model. These investment equations describe how
the stocks (also called capitals) in the model change from one time period to the
next, typically in response to changes in the stocks that relate to other aspects of
wellbeing. Everything else in the model happens within a time period or refers back
to previous time periods—only the changes in the stocks move the calculations
forward to the next time period. A time period could, in theory, be any length
provided the parameter values were chosen appropriately, but in practise one time
period is likely to be a year long, with the model running for decades (i.e. tens of
time periods). This is limited by if the model reaches limits such as negative wealth
(sometimes caused by insufficient feedback loops in the model), or by when the
time elapsed makes the projection meaningless—after about 50 years it could
easily be argued that technology and society will have changed more than the
model can sensibly accommodate.
As well as labelling the model equations as “stock” and “investment (flow)” equations, the model equations could also be labelled as “accounting” and “behaviour”
equations. In this description, accounting equations must hold by definition—for
example, the sum of the time taken for all activities during the day must add to
24hrs—but behaviour equations describe choices by households, firms, and others.
Behaviour equations encode our assumptions about how the world works, but
there is also a trade-off with model complexity, and they are the equations most
likely to be changed in future versions of the model. Currently, most behaviour in
the model is assumed to either optimise narrowly-defined utility functions, or to be
constant (and exogenous) over time; this need not be the case in future versions
of the model, nor need behaviour be fixed to just one option. The model results
are the logical implications of the assumptions that go into the model including the
constraints that the accounting equations imply.
The value of this model is in understanding how changes in one aspect of wellbeing
flow through to other aspects of wellbeing. This requires the inclusion of many
aspects of wellbeing and the links between them, which makes the model complex.
All other modelling decisions must then be made to avoid adding further complexity
without compromising this aim. As such, this model is not optimised across time
(it is myopic), nor is it fully optimised within a time period. This may also partially
reflect reality. Economics traditionally assumes that all agents optimise their utility,
which in this case is equivalent to their wellbeing (either lifetime or in a given time
period). While it is likely the case that agents optimise more of their wellbeing than
is modelled here, it is also likely (based on results from behavioural economics)
that for at least some aspects of wellbeing they use heuristics or satisficing rules
rather than optimisation.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

The relationships between different variables in this model are primarily identified
based on face validity, with some input from those who are experts or familiar
with the literature for each aspect of wellbeing. This has allowed the model to be
developed relatively quickly, albeit at the cost of empirical rigour. The expectation
is that future versions of the model will include much more rigourous evidence from
the literature and empirical research, which may change some of the relationships
included in this version of the model. Where relationships that turn out to be weak
have been included, this is usually easy to deal with in this version of the model
by setting the associated parameter to a low value (or, in some cases, to zero).
Where important relationships have not been included, this requires changing the
equations and represents a more significant limitation of this version of the model.
A frequent question that arises when measuring wellbeing is that of how (or
whether) the different aspects of wellbeing can be directly compared or combined
into a single value. In this model, an indexation and aggregation approach is
proposed, but it is not essential to the model and should be downplayed. Much
more important is the results for each aspect of wellbeing, and how they are
caused by and relate to the other aspects of wellbeing. These are best measured
in the natural units of the variable. A single measure of wellbeing is generally of
little use in policy settings as any changes in that value can only be understood in
the context of the cause of those changes.
This paper describes the design and equations of the model (applications of the
model including calibration, validation, results, and sensitivity analyses will be
presented in future papers). The next sections describe the modelling of the
different aspects of wellbeing, then the modelling of the supporting elements
such as the production sector. The paper concludes with a description of the
anticipated uses of the model and plans for future improvements. Additionally, the
appendices have a list of all the mathematical notation used in this paper with
precise definitions, a list of the equations in the order they are solved in, and
selected derivations of those equations.

2

The Eleven A s p e c t s o f We l l b e i n g

The OECD How’s Life? framework describes eleven aspects of wellbeing that provide near-complete coverage of what many people considers makes up wellbeing,
as described earlier. These eleven aspects and the interactions between them
form the basis of this model.

WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

7

2.1 Civic Engagement

Civic engagement is the term used to describe how engaged people in the society
are with how they are governed. A society with high civic engagement will have
high voter turnout, good stakeholder consultation by government, and a sense that
members of the society can influence the behaviour of government. With good
civic engagement, governments are held to account and so government spending
may be more effective. It is also easier for governments to implement policies that
the affected people have been involved in creating. Note that civic engagement
does not always make government spending more effective if it takes the form of
lobbying for policies that benefit a small group (for example, Federated Farmers,
Greypower) rather than everyone.
In this model, civic engagement is treated as a stock akin to social connection that
changes as other aspects of society change (in contrast, the OECD treats this as
a flow, due to the importance people attach to procedural utility). As such, it obeys
the standard stock evolution equation:
KCG,h,t+1 = (1 − δCG,h ) KCG,h,t + ICG,h,t

∀h, t

(1)

where δCG,h is the “natural” decline in civic engagement in the absence of any other
changes in society and ICG,h,t is the aggregate of the flow during the time period
t. The “natural” decline could be taken to reflect the cohort effect that is being
observed in a number of countries, where younger people are less likely to vote
than older people, and remain less likely to vote even as they age (Konzelmann,
Wagner, and Rattinger, 2012). Note that different household types may have
different levels of civic engagement, which reflects the fact that some sections
of society can be disengaged or unable to engage in a two-way manner with
government; it also reflects the fact that the children of civically-engaged parents
have a higher level of civic engagement.
The civic engagement aspect of wellbeing is represented solely by the stock of
civic engagement:
ˆ CG,h ,t = K
ˆ CG,h ,t
W
∀hS , t
(2)
S
S
The level of civic engagement in a society is affected by the level of education,
the net income, the social connection, the level of immigration, and the level of
unemployment. It is also affected by the level of leisure time available, without
which people may not have the time to engage with government even if they have
both the desire and the ability. Thus, the change in the level of civic engagement
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

2.2 Economic (Income & Wealth)
Economic wellbeing is an important part of providing ourselves with the necessities
of life and material pleasures, and it is an aspect of wellbeing that has been heavily
focussed on by governments and economists around the world. A lack of economic
wellbeing particularly impacts health, and can also negatively impact many other
aspects of wellbeing.
To have good economic wellbeing, a household must have money. This may be
in the form of financial wealth, inherited or accumulated over time; or it may be
from income from investments or from working in the labour market. This money
can then be spent on consumption. Consumption goods and services can also
be created by home production, so a low income need not force a low level of
consumption if the household has the time and skill to make what they need for
themselves.
Economic wellbeing is defined as the simple average of the indexes of the three
economic indicators—net income, total consumption, and financial wealth:

This follows the method used by the OECD Better Life Index (2017), where the
indicators, after conversion to indexes, are combined using a simple arithmetic
averages to get the indexes for each aspect of wellbeing.
Although these three indicators heavily overlap and are highly interrelated, they
do cover different concepts. Consumption is often smoother than income, as
wealth acts as a buffer. Changes in wealth are dependent on the difference
between income and consumption, but the level of wealth (and to a lesser extent,
income) is heavily influenced by the initial level of wealth. They also match with
the first recommendation of the Stiglitz Report (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi, 2009):
“When evaluating material wellbeing, look at income and consumption rather than
production” and the third recommendation “Consider income and consumption
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


This choice simplifies the model and represents the strong habit persistence
that can occur in the proportion of time spent working. However, it means that
households cannot choose to change their hours of work to increase their income
or their leisure time. It is common in static CGE (computable general equilibirum)
models for the total amount of labour to be fixed—it is part of the “closure” for such
models.
The total labour supply (per household) for production is adjusted for the productivity of the workers from health and education:

However, gross income is not the income that affects wellbeing. Households must
pay taxes on their income, and may receive transfers from the government. Net
income, the income after transfers (including benefit payments) and taxes, is a
better measure of economic wellbeing as it represents the money available for
households to save or spend on consumption. Net income is given by:
yh,t = (1 − τY,h ) Yh,t + ΓJ (JST,h,t + JLT,h,t )
+ γN W,h ΓN W JN W,h,t + γτ,h Γτ,t KN,S,t −1
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

2.2.2 Consumption
Households consume goods produced by the market and created by home production. However, not all consumption is desirable—consumption of goods and
services such as transport and personal safety are more about negating problems
rather than being attractive for consumption in their own right. Thus, the total
consumption defined here for use in calculating wellbeing excludes undesirable
consumption:

The processes for creating market goods and home production is described later,
in sections 3.1 and 3.3 respectively. However, the purchasing decisions for market
goods and services are made by the household, according to behavioural rules.
In this version of the model, two simple rules are used. First, the amount of money
the household spends on consumption remains constant:
Bh,t = Bh,t=0


This is a very simple choice, and suggests a very strong level of habit persistence
in the consumption behaviour of households. However, it is not very realistic as it
assumes income and wealth have no effect on prices. It is also more likely that
level of consumption, rather than budget of consumption, is the subject of habit
persistence.
Secondly, the household gets “utility” from consumption that they try to maximise.
This utility is given by a Cobb-Douglas function:
UC,h,t =


Note that transport consumption is excluded from this calculation as it is obtained
in the housing section 2.6 from time spent travelling (e.g. commuting), but it
includes all other types of consumption, essential and non-essential, desirable
and undesirable. This is solely for modelling reasons, i.e. not calcuating the same
variable twice.
A Cobb-Douglas utility function implies that although we get less value from each
additional unit of consumption, more consumption always gives greater utility.
This is certainly realistic up to a point, but it is not clear that it holds for all levels
of consumption. In principle, households should get utility from all aspects of
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

wellbeing and optimise their behaviour across this. However, this substantially
complicates the problem for both households and the modeller. Using the method
described here allows the allocation of consumption across different categories,
without commenting on choices around other aspects of wellbeing.
In maximising their utility, households face a budget constraint given by:
Bh,t =

Changes in wealth are due to inflation δIW,h and the difference between net income
and spending:
IIW,h,t = yh,t − Bh,t
∀h, t
(16)
This assumes all household wealth is held in (or can be liquidised to) financial
forms rather than in physical forms such as housing. While not particularly realistic,
it matches with the treatment of housing in the current version of the model.

2.3 Education
Many people value education, knowledge, and skills for their own sake. Learning
new skills and knowledge often creates a sense of achievement and satisfies our
curiosity, as well as increasing employability, making labour more productive, and
improving our ability to look after our health, the environment, and participate in
civic issues.
However, it takes a significant investment of both time and money to obtain a
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

good education and reasonable level of skills. People spend an average of 17.5
years in formal education in OECD countries (OECD, 2017) mostly before entering
the workforce. They then continue to develop skills on the job (and elsewhere)
throughout their working career and sometimes beyond. Typically, the government
will pay most of the cost of primary and secondary education, but a much smaller
proportion of tertiary education.
In this model, we will consider two types of education-related human capital—skills
and formal education. Formal education occurs outside the workplace, typically
(but not exclusively) at a school, university, or polytechnic. It takes time away
from other activities a household may perform (including earning an income), and
must be paid for either by the government or the household. It often leads to a
qualification.
Skills are defined as the result of on-the-job training and experience and are harder
to measure. They are effectively paid for by producers, who must lose productive
time from their employees to invest in their skills. However, producers benefit from
the increase in skills through improved productivity. As much of this training is
provided on-the-job or as experience, there are no direct costs to be paid.
Both skills and formal education evolve over time according to the standard stock
equation:

where δESF,h and δESS,h are the rates at which we forget what we’ve learnt (or our
knowledge becomes irrelevant), and IESF,h,t and IESS,h,t are the results of the effort
put into increasing formal education and skills respectively. These two stocks are
the indicators for the education aspect of wellbeing, and are combined into the
wellbeing index using a simple average of the indexes of the two stocks:

2.3.1 Formal Education
The quantity of formal education demanded is determined in this model by the
supply of education. Education can be supplied by the government, by the market,
and by home production:
QESF,h,t =


This supply of formal education is converted to an increase in formal education
level with an efficiency that depends on the existing education level:
IESF,h,t = AESF,h KESF,h,t ηESF,h QESF,h,t

Formal study also requires time that cannot then be used for leisure, work, or other
purposes. We estimate the (health-adjusted) amount of time spent studying based
on the investment in formal education:
T˜ES,h,t = AES,T,h IESF,h,t


Removing the health adjustment means the time required to consume these
education services is given by:
TES,h,t = AHS,ES,h KHS,h,t −ηHS,ES,h T˜ES,h,t



2.3.2 Skills
Training for skills are provided by producers to the labour they employ. This means
that, of the time they pay wages for, a proportion will be dedicated to skills training,
and the remainder to production:


The efficiency with which this can be done (incorporating current education, skill,
and health levels) is already incorporated in the time allowed.

2.4 Environment
The quality of the environment we live in affects our wellbeing in several different
ways. High levels of pollution negatively impact physical health. Lack of green
spaces negatively affects mental health. Production depends on accessing natural
resources and being able to emit pollution to natural sinks. Biodiversity contributes
to technological progress (for example, biomining for new drugs; biomimicry
in engineering). A natural, unpolluted environment also provides a variety of
recreational opportunities and its existence is valued for its own sake by many
people who may never visit an untouched habitat.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

14

In this model, three aspects of the environment are considered: resources, pollution, and biodiversity. The level of resources is important for production, but does
not directly impact on the environment aspect of wellbeing. However, the pollution
level and the biodiversity level are both used as indicators for the environment
aspect of wellbeing:


2.4.1 Resources
Resources are defined as goods provided by the natural environment that are
valued for their use in production. In this model, two types of resources are
recognised: stock resources and flow resources. A flow resource is always
renewable and is generally difficult to store—sunlight being an excellent example.
Use of a flow resource for production is constrained by the cost of extracting it
and the rate of flow; and it is not affected by the level of use in the previous time
period. For notational purposes it is still necessary to define the stock level of flow
resource, and so (using the standard evolution equation) it is given as:

and this defines an upper bound on the amount of flow resource that can be
extracted, given by:

A stock resource, such as fish or coal, may or may not be renewable, but is
characterised by being able to be stored. We assume the stocks do not deteriorate
or decline with storage. However, this stored resource may run out if it is used
faster than it regenerates (in the case of a renewable resource) or within a finite
time period (in the case of a non-renewable resource). The level of the stock
resource is also given by the standard evolution equation:


where δEQ,j=EQS = 0 for non-renewable stocks, and δEQ,j=EQS < 0 is the regeneration rate for renewable stocks. Note that this means renewable stocks grow
exponentially without limit if they are not used, which is clearly unrealistic. However,
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
we assume that the range of values that Kj=EQS,t take remain in a realistic range
over the timeframe the model is run for.
The “investment” in the level of the stock resource is simply the reduction due to
the extraction of the resource:


These equations define the resources as they are before human intervention. They
must then be extracted (as described in the production section 3.1) for use in
production where they become valuable for human wellbeing.

2.4.2 Pollution
Pollution is emitted into the natural environment by production. The environment
can absorb and neutralise some pollution, but pollution flows in excess of this
level build up in the environment, damaging biodiversity and creating health risks.
Most types of pollution form geographic concentrations, often in the area they are
emitted, but sometimes elsewhere such as polluted streams emptying into a lake.
A few forms of pollution do not become geographically concentrated, but have
global impacts, such as carbon dioxide.
The total level of pollution experienced by a society is governed by the standard
evolution equation:
KΨ,S,t+1 = (1 − δΨ,S ) KΨ,S,t + IΨ,S,t

where δΨ,S > 0 is the rate the natural environment can neutralise pollution. Note
that this assumes the more pollution there is, the more pollution can be neutralised.
This assumption is appropriate for low levels of pollution, but the converse is
much more likely to be true in highly polluted environments which may become
overloaded.
Apart from natural absorption, there are two factors that change the level of
pollution: the level of pollution emitted by production in each time period, and the
spending (and effectiveness of that spending) by government primarily on clean-up.
This gives the “investment” in the pollution level:


As this model does not contain geographic information, it is assumed that all
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


households experience the same (societal) level of pollution, which is given by:


(34)

2.4.3 Biodiversity
Biodiversity is also an environmental stock. It is valuable as an enabler for production and for health, as well as in its own right. As a stock, it is governed by the
standard evolution equation:


Like a renewable stock resource, it is assumed that biodiversity stocks can regenerate themselves (i.e. δEQ,S < 0), although in the absence of other effects
that reduce biodiversity this again results in unlimited exponential growth. In this
model other effects come in two types: spending by government on increasing
biodiversity, and the negative effects of pollution on biodiversity. This results in the
additional “investment” in biodiversity given by:


It is also assumed that all households experience the same level of biodiversity,
which is given by:

(37)
This is a more realistic assumption than for pollution, as the location of biodiversity
relative to households has much less impact on different household types than the
geographic distribution of pollution.

2.5 Health
Good health is a crucial part of wellbeing. Without it, we feel uncomfortable at
best, and it also prevents us improving other aspects of our wellbeing. In the worst
case scenario, poor health leads to (early) death.
It also has large impacts on how we can spend our time. Poor health effectively
reduces our ability to use our time well, reducing the intensity with which we can
work, play, and study, and increasing the time needed for personal care including
resting and receiving medical treatments and monitoring. This applies both to
physical and to mental health.
Our health level is affected by many factors, some of which also relate to other
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

17

aspects of our wellbeing. There is a strong degree of continuity, with people who
currently have good health likely to continue to have good health in the future, and
those who do not continuing to have poor health. When we do get sick, the level
of healthcare we have access to (relative to the level we need) determines how
quickly (or whether) we get better. Wealth, education, leisure, social connections,
and housing can all improve health for the better, as can life satisfaction and
personal safety. Unemployment, pollution, and a degraded natural environment
can make it worse.
The average level of health is modelled here as a stock, and evolves over time
according to the standard stock equation:


(38)

where δHS,h is the natural decline in health over time in the absence of healthcare
provision or any other drivers of health change. This value should vary depending
on the age of the people in the household. All other changes in health (both
improvements and declines) are incorporated into the health investment term
IHS,h,t . This health level is the only indicator used for the health aspect of wellbeing:


(39)

The health investment term—change in health level—is determined by adding
the change in each of the factors that affect health, multiplied by an effectiveness
parameter for that factor. This assumes that each of these factors act independently
and linearly on health. These factors that affect health are the excess of demand for
health services above supply, the level of biodiversity, the wealth, formal education
level, unemployment level of the household type, life satisfaction, social connection,
and personal safety of the household. Note that for a few variables, i.e. level of
pollution, housing quality and quantity, and health-adjusted leisure, health changes
are due to the level of these variables, and not the change as for other factors that
affect health:


Most of these values are determined in other parts of the model, demand for and
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


supply of healthcare being the exception. Demand for healthcare is modelled as
a function of current health, with healthier people requiring less healthcare than
those in poorer health:
CHS,h,t = AHS,h KHS,h,t −ηHS,h


This way of modelling healthcare assumes that demand for healthcare increases
rapidly as health levels decline. Note that it does not take account of the increase
in demand for healthcare services due to greater wealth or income which can
create higher expectations. Healthcare supply, on the other hand, is given by
the total of home production (e.g. carers), market purchases of healthcare, and
government supply:


Thus, supply and demand of healthcare services do not necessarily match, and if
demand for healthcare services exceeds supply, this will have a negative impact
on health. Note that health is modelled in an analogous way to personal safety.

2.6 Housing
The need for shelter is one of the basic necessities of life, and the quality of that
shelter can have a large impact on wellbeing. In the New Zealand climate, good
quality housing is warm and dry and should not have the drafts, damp, and mould
that can cause or exacerbate health problems such as asthma. The location
of the housing is important—if it is not close to friends and families, schools,
workplaces, and amenities, too much time and money must be spent on transport
or alternatively social connections, education, and income will suffer. This is also
dependent on the type of transport available, as it is much easier to travel 10km to
work each day if you can take a train or drive on an uncongested road than if you
are constrained to walking.
Good quality housing also has enough room for its occupants. Overcrowding
increases the risk of infectious diseases and can also be stressful and unpleasant
for the occupants. The quantity of housing is also closely linked to the price of
housing—the cheaper housing is, the less likely it will be overcrowded to save
money. The price of housing is also important in its own right. Because housing
is a necessity, it is usually a high priority in a household’s budget, and expensive
housing reduces the amount of money available for other consumption including
food, healthcare, and education.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
The indexes of these four indicators—quality, quantity, price, and location (proxied
by transport time)—are used to calculate the housing aspect of wellbeing:


In this version of the model, households spend a constant proportion of their time
travelling:
THO,h,t = THO,h,t=0
∀h, t
(44)
While a useful simplification for modelling purposes, this is quite restrictive. It
does not allow for many things that can change transport time for households
including moving to a better location (possibly increasing housing costs to decrease
transport time and costs), changing transport mode (such as from walking to public
transport), or environmental changes such as an increase in congestion.
As well as using time, most transport methods cost money. This is modelled by
assuming that the consumption of the specific final transport good is proportional
to the time spent travelling:


Note that home production of transport could include active modes like walking
or cycling, which would have a positive impact on health. This link has not been
included in this version of the model.
Housing itself is supplied by the production of two specific final goods—good
quality housing and bad quality housing. These are produced and sold in the
same way as any other final good. This simplifies the modelling considerably, but
ignores the fact that housing is a durable good and so misses many important
aspects of the housing market that can have large effects on the price of housing.
It does however have the advantage of automatically including running costs (e.g.
heating) in the housing price naturally and without any further adjustments.
Distinguishing good quality housing (HOG) from bad quality housing (HOB)
allows the calculation of a quality indicator, defined as the proportion of good
quality housing to total housing:


The meaning of “good quality housing” does not affect these equations, and can
be chosen to fit the data and needs of the user. However, it will generally be used
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
to here to mean housing that does not have a major problem with damp, cold, or
mould, as these are major problems with the quality of some New Zealand homes.
The quantity of housing is important for indicating overcrowding, and as such it is
measured as the number of rooms per person in the household:


The number of people per household is assumed to be constant:
nh,t = nh,t=0


Finally, for the purposes of the housing aspect of wellbeing, it is the price of
housing as a proportion of (net) income that is important. Thus the price of
housing indicator is given by:
PHO,h,t = yh,t −1 (PC,k=HOB,t Ch,k=HOB,t + PC,k=HOG,t Ch,k=HOG,t )



2.7 Jobs
While many people bemoan the need to have a job, it is generally recognised that
the benefits of having a good-quality job extend beyond the income it provides. A
good-quality job can provides people with meaning and purpose, independence,
social connections, stability, status, and skills development; as well as the means
to provide for their economic wellbeing. Being unemployed, i.e. willing to work but
not having a job, is generally considered bad for one’s wellbeing, creating financial
stress, boredom, and negatively affecting self-esteem.
Not all jobs are good quality, and for some people the disadvantages of having
even a good-quality job outweigh the advantages. These people may also be
able to achieve fulfilment and the other benefits of jobs by other means, and
are considered “not in the workforce”. This includes people unable to work due
to health or disability, parents of young children and other carers, children and
full-time students, and retired people.
A good-quality job is one that is well-matched to the worker’s skills, pays well,
is respected, and contributes meaningfully to society. The hours of work are
reasonable (neither too few nor too many, and at an appropriate time of day), the
tenure secure (so little or no concern of being fired or made redundant), and the
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


workplace pleasant and no more dangerous that strictly necessary. A poor quality
job will be missing many of these attributes. Highly skilled or educated people
are better able to obtain good quality jobs, but the number of jobs available is
determined primarily by the state of the economy.
All people in the society fit into one of three categories—employed (including
part-time), unemployed, or not in the workforce. The unemployed can be further
divided into short-term unemployed, who have been unemployed for less than
a year, and long-term unemployed. While short-term unemployed people can
often find a job on their own in a short time if the general economic conditions are
good enough, long-term unemployed people are more likely to suffer from complex
issues that make them less employable. Thus, the short-term unemployment rate
can be related to the business cycle, but the level of long-term unemployment
reflects longer-term issues.
Using these ideas, the proportion of people that are short-term unemployed,
long-term unemployed, and not-in-the-workforce can be related to the level of
employment in the society. First, if short-term unemployment is determined by the
business cycle, then it can be modelled by assuming it is connected to employment
by a constant elasticity of substitution:
JST,h,t = AJ,ST,h JE,h,t −1/ηST,h


This assumes that most of the changes in employment due to the business cycle
are absorbed by changes in short-term unemployment. The rest of any changes
in employment must be absorbed by the long-term unemployed, and those notin-the-workforce. Both of these groups can be difficult to get into work (for very
different reasons), but we assume that the people in these two groups enter or
leave the workforce in a fixed ratio φJ,h . This means the long-term unemployment
rate is given by:
JLT,h,t = (1 + φJ,h )−1 (AJ,LT,h − JE,h,t − JST,h,t )




This assumption is often implicitly made in static CGE models that hold labour
supply fixed as part of their closure. Later versions of the model will need to link
the employment rate to the demand for labour for production.
The employment rate and the long-term unemployment rate comprise two of the
indicators for the jobs aspect of wellbeing. The other two indicators are wage rates
and a measure of job security. Thus, the index for the jobs aspect of wellbeing is
given by:


While the wage rate is important for determining household income, it is also
important in its own right as an indicator of job status and quality—both of which
typically (but not always) correspond with the wages paid for the work.

2.8 Personal Safety
Personal safety is primarily an indication of the crime (particularly violent crime)
level in the society—the lower the level of crime, the greater the level of personal
safety. Obviously, personal safety will also be negatively affected for countries
involved in war on their territory, but this is a rare event in New Zealand and some
other OECD countries. Levels of corruption and white-collar crime have less effect
on personal safety than violent crime and some forms of property crime.
People who have a lack of personal safety will usually be living their lives in fear.
This has effects on their physical and mental health. It may restrict their activities,
indirectly affecting their ability to earn an income, get educated, and generally
enjoy life. Trust is reduced, impacting negatively on communities and business.
The average level of personal safety is modelled here as a stock that can change
over time:
KP S,h,t+1 = (1 − δP S,h ) KP S,h,t + IP S,h,t
∀h, t
(57)
where δP S,h is included for consistency with the other captial evolution equations
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

23

and could be interpreted as the natural decline in personal safety in the absence
of any policing or other drivers of change in personal safety. Note that this ignores
the distinction between the true level of crime, and the reported level of crime. As
most crime is under-reported, but to varying extents, a change in the measured
level in crime may reflect a change in the true level and/or a change in reporting
patterns. All other changes in personal safety (both improvements and declines)
are incorporated into the personal safety investment term IP S,h,t .
This personal safety level is the only indicator used for the personal safety aspect
of wellbeing:

The personal safety investment—change in personal safety—is determined by
adding the change in each of the factors that affect personal safety, multiplied
by an effectiveness parameter for that factor. This assumes that each of these
factors act independently and linearly on personal safety. These factors that affect
personal safety are the excess need for policing and other crime prevention above
the supply of policing and crime prevention services, social connection, net income
of households, and the level of formal education. Poor mental health and long-term
unemployment increase the risk of crime and therefore decrease personal safety.
It is less clear whether short-term unemployment and inequality also decrease
personal safety. This results in:

Most of these values are determined elsewhere in the model, demand and supply
for crime prevention being the exception. Demand for crime prevention is modelled
as a function of current personal safety, with safer societies requiring less crime
prevention than those that are more dangerous:
CP S,h,t = AP S,h KP S,h,t −ηP S,h


This way of modelling crime prevention assumes that demand for crime prevention
increases rapidly as personal safety levels decline. Note that it does not take
account of the increase in demand for crime prevention due to greater wealth or
income which can create higher expectations.

WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
Supply of policing and security, on the other hand, is given by the total of home
production (e.g. good parenting, escorting family members at night), market
purchases of security and prevention, and government supply of crime prevention
services including policing, rehabilitation, and prevention:


Thus, supply and demand of crime prevention services do not necessarily match,
and if demand for crime prevention services exceeds supply, this will have a
negative effect on personal safety. Note that personal safety is modelled in an
analogous way to health.

2.9 Social Connection (Community)
Humans are a social species, and as such good social connections are extremely
important to our wellbeing. The quality of family and other relationships are one of
the most important factors affecting subjective wellbeing. Good social connections
can improve our health, increase our resilience, and increase the likelihood of
finding a good quality job. Poor social connection leads to isolation and loneliness
as well as making it much harder to get things done.
Like many of the other aspects of wellbeing in this model, social connection is
modelled as a stock that can be invested in for improvement (or decline):
KSC,h,t+1 = (1 − δSC,h ) KSC,h,t + ISC,h,t


where δSC,h is included for consistency with the other captial evolution equations
and could be interpreted as the natural rate of decline in social connection. The
social connection aspect of wellbeing is then given by the level of social connection:


While levels of social connection are significantly affected by factors outside this
model, such as friendships, there are also a number of factors included in the
model which can also improve or worsen the chances of good social connections.
A change in any of these can cause a proportional change in social connection.
These factors include health-adjusted leisure time, volunteering, employment,
formal education, personal safety, health, and civic engagement. A high population,
high immigration levels, or high level of wealth inequality can decrease social
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
connection:



Volunteering is defined here as the home production done for others. This is easy
to detect in the model if it is done for different household types, but we also assume
that some proportion of home production is for different households of the same
type, and thus is considered volunteering:


2.10 Subjective Wellbeing
Subjective wellbeing is measured by life satisfaction. It is broader than happiness,
and includes how people feel about their lives as a whole rather than their current
emotional state. It is commonly measured on a 0–10 scale, where people are
asked to rate their life as a whole where zero represents the worst possible life for
them and ten represents the best possible life for them.
Subjective measures can be difficult to model, as they can be heavily influenced
by random events and differences between personalities. In particular, the level
of life satisfaction can be difficult to predict, especially from objective information.
In addition, as this is a wellbeing model, the most obvious way to model life
satisfaction would be to model wellbeing. If life satisfaction is an aspect of wellbeing,
this becomes circular.
However, it has been shown that positive and negative shocks have ongoing effects
on life satisfaction, with negative shocks having a larger effect than the equivalent
positive shock. This suggests a way of modelling the change in life satisfaction
that is distinct from modelling wellbeing as a whole.
Start by assuming that the current level of life satisfaction is a “neutral” level,
determined by culture and temperament, but unaffected by shocks from the past.
Then changes from this level can be modelled by the effect of shocks, discounted
by how long ago they occurred, and weighted differently based on whether they
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
caused a loss or a gain. This last aspect allows us to take account of loss aversion,
where a decrease in income (for example) has a larger effect than an equivalent
increase in income.
There are many aspects of life that affect life satisfaction and are included in this
wellbeing model. It could be argued that all other aspects of wellbeing should be
included, although this could reduce the tractability of the model. As such, given the
approach taken to modelling life satisfcation described above, the equation looks
for variables that might have a persistent affect (a change in the past continues
to affect you today, even if you have returned to your pre-change level), or a
strong difference between positive and negative shocks. Health, net income, social
connection, formal education level, job security, personal safety, and altruism
(measured as time spent volunteering) all improve life satisfaction. Unemployment,
time spent commuting, pollution, and whether you are less financially wealthy than
your neighbours can decrease life satisfaction. This means the investment in life
satisfaction is given by:
s≤t


2.11 Work-Life Balance
We all only have twenty-four hours in a day, but we can choose to use that time
in many different ways. Some of that time is spent in activities that are directly
pleasurable, and some is spent doing things that are necessary for improving our
wellbeing such as working. Work-life balance describes the trade-off between
two aspects of modern life—the time desired for leisure and personal care on the
one hand, and the time that must be spent working (both paid work and home
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
production), on transportation, and on education in order to live and improve other
aspects of wellbeing on the other hand.
Time spent working in a paid job TIW,h,t is determined by the job and the need for
income to provide for the economic needs of the household. Time spent on home
production TQ,h1 ,h2 ,k,t is determined by what needs to be done around the house as
well as unpaid work for others. Time spent on education TES,h,t leads to improved
skills and qualifications. Time spent on transportation THO,h,t is determined by the
location of the home relative to the place of work and other activities. (Note that
time spent on transportation and home production are given exogenously in this
prototype model). All these uses of time have limited flexibility, and may cause
a “time crunch”, where the time left over for leisure and personal care (including
sleeping) feels insufficient.
In this model, the time available for leisure and personal care is defined as the time
left over after the other activities listed above have taken place, as a proportion of
time:


As in the rest of the model, these values are averaged across a household, and so
we do not distinguish individuals from households.
However, equation (69) takes no account of the ability of individuals to take
advantage of that time. Health and social connection, in particular, affect the
quality of time available to a person both in their ability to enjoy and make the
most of that time, and in the amount of time they must dedicate to personal care
and rest. Therefore, we apply adjustments for health and social connection to the
amount of leisure time a household has available:


Suppor ting E l e m e n t s o f t h e M o d e l

The eleven aspects of wellbeing described in the previous section do not form
a complete model by themselves. There are a number of supporting elements
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

required to complete the model and to allow for a variety of policy and other
experiments within the model. This includes a production sector and a government
sector, and interactions with the rest of the world.

3.1 The Production Sector
The production sector is an important supporting element of wellbeing for households and general society. The production sector provides the jobs that enable
job-related wellbeing. Those jobs, and the use of capital, provide the income
for the economic aspect of wellbeing. They also provide most of the goods and
services for consumption (again contributing to the economic aspect of wellbeing).
Housing, healthcare, transportation, policing and security, and education services
are provided by the production sector. Production also affects the environment.
Production is the process that converts a certain set of inputs into a different set
of outputs. At the highly abstract level required in this model, the inputs include
capital and labour, and production is enabled by technology, personal safety,
infrastructure, social connections, and the natural environment. Traditionally, many
of these enablers are included in multi-factor productivity, but they are made explicit
in this model. It then outputs the desirable consumption goods and services, as
well as undesired pollution.
In this model, production is treated similarly to how it would be treated in a static
CGE model. In fact, the production sector in combination with the household
consumption choices form a simple CGE model, with closure provided by a
combination of variables exogenous to the whole model and variables calculated
using the other parts of the model, particularly the stock and flow equations.
There are several different divisions in the way production is modelled here. First,
goods and services are divided into extracted goods that do not have any intermediate inputs and are not available as consumption goods; and produced
(final) goods that use extracted goods as intermediate inputs and are available
for consumption. Second, goods and services can be produced in different ways,
based on the environmental friendliness of the method of production. Finally, many
of the produced goods are important for aspects of wellbeing beyond the economic
aspect, such as for housing or healthcare, and these are produced by specific
production sectors.

3.1.1 Extraction
Extraction goods are used for intermediate consumption by final production sectors, but are not available for final consumption by households or government.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
Conceptually, they include primary production goods like coal, fish, water, and
sunlight that are available “for free” from the environment, but must be extracted
using labour and capital in the form of machinery. For modelling purposes, we
assume that no intermediate inputs from other industries are required to produce
extraction goods. Production of extraction goods are enabled by levels of social
connection, personal safety, biodiversity, and government-provided infrastructure
such as roading. They are also enabled (unlike final goods) by the level of resource
available, as the more resource there is, the easier it is to extract. These enablers
of production are things that are necessary for production, but are neither used up
nor directly paid for by extraction producers. This is illustrated in Figure 2.
Two generic extraction goods are modelled—a flow resource and a stock resource.
These are described in more detail in the environment sector above, as both
require natural resources and impact on the level of those resources.



3.1.2 Final Production
Final production goods are all other (i.e. excluding extraction) goods and services.
They are sold directly to the final consumer, which may be the government or
households. They require extraction goods as well as factors of production such as
capital and labour for their production. They also require most of the same enablers
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

30

as extraction production, namely social connection, personal safety, biodiversity,
and government-provided infrastructure. This is illustrated in Figure 3.

Figure 3

Production process for final goods

The final goods production has a number of sectors, several of which are used for
specific purposes for other parts of the model. Education, healthcare services,
transport, policing and security, and good and bad quality housing are all included
as final production sectors and described further in the appropriate aspect of
wellbeing above. In addition, there is an “other” sector for all other types of goods
and services produced for consumption in the economy.

3.1.3 Clean and Dirty Processes
The environmental friendliness of the production process is modelled using “clean”
and “dirty” production processes. Any given production process for any particular
good sits somewhere on a continuum between “clean”, which is low-polluting and
generally environmentally friendly (it could even have a positive impact on the
environment), and “dirty”, which is not. In this model, a dividing line is placed on
this continuum, roughly halfway between the two extremes, and all processes on
the clean side are grouped as “clean”, and all others (on the dirty side) grouped
as “dirty”. Clean and dirty processes are modelled using the same equations, but
the parameters in those equation can take different values, which will be averages
of all the different processes in the group. Note that although the dividing line is
placed halfway between “clean” and “dirty”, this does not necessarily mean that
half of production is clean and half is dirty.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


Clean processes will produce less pollution per unit of production than dirty
processes, but the modelling method is the same for both. Note that a final goods
producer could reduce their level of pollution by reducing this parameter (e.g.
switching to a cleaner process), but also by reducing the proportion of extraction
goods required in production.
The technology used in each production process is assumed to be constant in this
version of the model:

(77)

This assumption will hold true when perfect competition exists, but will understate
prices if the situation is closer to a monopoly.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

32

However, goods and services are demanded for consumption, rather than production processes. Thus, the results of clean and dirty production must be combined
into a single product for consumption (final production goods) or use in production
(extraction goods). As we assume the goods and services created by each production process are imperfect substitutes for each other, a CES (constant elasticity
of substitution) function is used to combine them:


We have determined the economic environment producers operate in by requiring
profits to be zero. The behaviour of the producer within that environment must also
be determined. As profits are required to be zero, producers cannot maximise profit.
Instead, we assume they maximise production (subject to the profit constraint).
This allows us to calculate the demand for both the factors of production and the
extraction goods (derivation in Appendix C):


3.1.5 Market Clearing Conditions
This model also assumes that all markets—both for factors of production and
for goods and services—clear. Thus demand equals supply for all factors of
production and goods and services, and this is used to determine the price of the
factors of production and the quantity of each good or service.
The demand (and therefore supply) for final production goods and services is
given by the total consumption demand from households and government:

The price for factors of production can be divided into two groups based on whether
the price for the factor of production depends on the process of production. In
this version of the model, the price of capital does not depend on the process of
production. However, the effective price PL,Q,h,e,q,t
paid by producers for labour
˜
varies by sector and production process, based on what proportion of time the
labour spends developing their skills (as described earlier). These prices can be
related to the generic price for labour as follows:

The effective price of capital is the same as the user price of capital for all sectors
and production processes:


3.2 Interactions with the Rest of the World

This model is for a small open economy, and thus interactions with the rest of
the world are important. These interactions may take the form of imports and
exports of goods and services (both extraction and final), of capital, and of people
(migration). There are also other interactions with the rest of the world, most
notably the interchange of ideas, that aren’t included in this model.
As this model is for a small economy, it is assumed that this economy does not
have an effect on international prices (in international currency) or international
levels of personal safety etc., and so they are exogenous. For simplicity, they are
also chosen to be constant over time:


Note that prices paid for imports of goods and capital and prices received for
exports of goods and capital need not be the same. However, “exports” and
“imports” for wages paid by the rest of the world are not distinguished from each
other in this model. The exchange rate is also chosen for simplicity to be exogenous
and constant:
RROW,t = RROW,t=0
∀t
(93)
This is in contrast to the floating exchange rate that New Zealand and many other
economies use.
The exchange rate can then be used to convert the international prices for imports
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype



Note that there are no tariffs included in the import prices (or subsidies for exports),
as these are minimal in New Zealand.

3.2.1 Imports and Exports of Goods
When an economy produces goods and services (both extraction and final), those
goods can either be sold on the domestic market, or exported overseas. Similarly,
local consumers can either buy goods produced domestically, or imports. This is
shown diagrammatically in Figure 4.

Figure 4

Imports and Exports of Goods and Services



subject to the constant elasticity of transformation (CET) functions:

The level of exports is then given by:


Domestically-consumed goods can be sourced from imports or non-exported
domestic production, at cost:
PC,q,t QC,q,t = PM,q,t QM,q,t + PD,q,t QD,q,t


Assume imports and domestically-produced goods are imperfect substitutes (the
Armington assumption). The total goods available for consumption are therefore
given by the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function:


Minimising the cost (104) subject to the total goods available (105), the level of

WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype



The full derivation of these equations is given in Appendix C.

3.2.2 Imports and Exports of Financial Capital
Imports and export of financial capital are treated in a similar way to the import
and export of production goods and services. As with goods, the domestic supply
of capital can be used by domestic firms or invested overseas. Capital demanded
for government debt or production can either be supplied from local sources, or
received as investment from overseas. This is shown diagrammatically in Figure 5.
To determine the level of exports of capital, maximise the revenue of the suppliers
of capital:


The full derivation of these equations is given in Appendix C.

3.2.3 Migration
Migration is treated somewhat differently to imports and exports of capital and
goods, as the decisions for migration are rarely made on purely economic grounds,
and it can take some time for households to move between countries.
There are many reasons why a household may wish to move from one country to
another. These include higher wages or better job opportunities, better lifestyle,
educational opportunities, and reuniting with family. New Zealand traditionally
has an advantage in lifestyle, and a disadvantage (relative to other developed
countries) in wages and job opportunities. As such, people tend to leave New
Zealand for job opportunities (the traditional OE (Overseas Experience) being a
partial exception), and people tend to come (or return) to New Zealand for greater
personal safety, a higher quality natural environment, education, work-life balance,
and general subjective wellbeing.
Emigration can therefore be modelled as proportional to the difference between
wages overseas and in New Zealand:



While it is generally expected that international wages will be higher than New
Zealand wages, if this is not the case, negative emigration (i.e. immigration) may
occur, particularly with New Zealanders returning home.
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

Again, it is assumed that New Zealand will be better than the rest of the world in
these aspects of wellbeing, but if this is no longer the case negative immigration
(i.e. emigration) may occur.
The change in the number of households of any given type is therefore given by
the level of net migration:
IN,h,t = NM,h,t − NX,h,t


3.3 Home Production
Not all production is done by firms, or is part of the formal economy. There are
many tasks that households routinely perform for themselves, that would not be
described as leisure. Instead, they contribute to the household’s standard of living
and can substitute for consumption of market goods and services. Cooking, cleaning, childcare, and many other household tasks that were traditionally the domain
of housewives fit into this category; as does gardening and home maintenance
work not purchased as market services.
Recipients of home production can be divided into two groups—those in the same
household as the producer, and those in a different household to the producer.
In both cases, this adds to the wellbeing of the recipient household. In the case
where the recipient is in a different household to the producer, it also strengthens
communities and improves the life satisfaction of the producer through a sense of
altruism.
The main inputs into home production are time and skill. Some materials may
also be needed, for example food for cooking, but these are assumed to be
part of the household’s market consumption. Coming out of home production
are consumption goods and services that are substitutes for market goods and
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

41

services. Home production is modelled using a simple one-input Cobb-Douglas
production function:


Health- and education-adjusted time input into home production activities T˜Q,h1 ,h2 ,k,t
is the main factor determining the level of home production output Qh1 ,h2 ,k,t , and
the only factor that can change over time. The effect on home production of putting
in more time is given by the elasticity of home production with respect to time
ηQ,T,h1 ,k . This is likely to be close to one, as typically putting more time into say
cooking will result in a proportional increase in cooked meals. Skill Ah1 ,k defines
how many cooked meals can be made in a given amount of time and is assumed
to be constant over time, but could be different for different household types.
Time put into home production activities is adjusted for health, as people in good
health can generally perform home production tasks more efficiently than those
in poor health, who may for example need to pause during the activity to rest. It
is also adjusted for education and skill levels (as a proxy for intellect or ability to
learn), as again people with high education and skills are more likely to be able to
perform home production tasks more efficiently, just as their labour productivity is
higher. These adjustments are modelled as follows:


(123)

In order to calculate home production, we therefore need to know how much time
is dedicated to home production of each type of production good k by household
h1 for household h2 (which may or may not be the same as h1 ) in each time period
t. This is a behavioural choice for the household, and for modelling simplicity it is
treated as exogenous and constant:




In a future version of the model, skills could also be developed through home
production, in a similar way to the development of skills in market production.

3.4 Government
The government makes up a large component of the economy, and it has the
ability to influence much of the rest of the economy and society more broadly. It
is also tasked with running the country. In a democracy, governments that do a
better job of running the country well—presumably by at least maintaining the
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


wellbeing of its citizens—are more likely to be re-elected. Thus, governments are
motivated to improve the wellbeing of their citizens, and have a number of tools
to achieve this. This means that including a government sector in this wellbeing
model is highly important, and even more so as the model is intended for use in
policy analysis by government officials!

3.4.1 Fiscal Policy
The main role of the government in the model is to raise income through taxes
for spending and redistribution. Three types of taxes are collected in the model:
income tax, consumption tax, and pollution tax:
Note that this does not include any form of company or production tax. The
government uses this income for spending, investing, and providing transfers back
to households. It must also pay interest on any debt it owes. However, it need not
maintain a balanced budget and in any given year it can lend or borrow to make
up the difference between income and expenditure.
For the purposes of this model, the government requires government debt to be
maintained at a fixed ratio of GDP:

This is a rigid version of the previous government’s aspiration to have net debt
at about 20% of GDP in 2020 (Treasury, 2017). It means total expenditure, on
spending, investment, interest, and transfers, must be given by:
EG,t = YG,t + (DG,t+1 − DG,t )

∀t

(128)

3.4.2 Spending
The government spends money for a variety of different purposes, and part of the
government budget process is deciding how to divide the available funds. In this
version of the model, the government can spend money on decreasing pollution,
increasing biodiversity, increasing personal safety, on providing healthcare and
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

43

formal education services, and on other consumption goods and services. These
are decided exogenously, and are kept constant. Most of these are decided at the
societal level:
SG,a,t = SG,a,t=0
∀a, t
(129)
However, education, health, and personal safety spending is broken down by the
household type that receives the services:
3.4.3 Government Wealth
The government holds a significant level of wealth, and this is assumed to be
physical wealth in the form of infrastructure, which is an enabler of production.
As with other stocks in the model, infrastructure levels change according to the
standard evolution equation:


There are many different choices governments could make for investment in
infrastructure. Here, we assume that infrastructure investment occurs at a rate
that counteracts depreciation and allows for population growth:


This essentially keeps the level of infrastructure constant relative to population.
This provides for a baseline level of maintenance, but does not take into account
common variations around this that are typically due to more ad-hoc decisions by
the government. Equation (134) could easily be replaced if a different policy for
infrastructure investment were to be modelled.

3.4.4 Transfers
Transfers are the cash and in-kind payments made to households usually to
redistribute wealth within a society or to alleviate poverty. These are modelled in
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype
two groups. First are the transfers that could be defined as social welfare payments
that vary according to the conditions in the economy and society. They include
unemployment benefits (paid to all who are unemployed), and other benefits such
as government-provided superannuation and benefits to people who cannot work:
The remaining transfers are calculated as a residual so that the government can
meet its fiscal policy:


They could be thought of as spending in other categories not included above that
act like a cash payment to households.

3.4.5 Consumption

When the government spends money on investment or providing services, it is
essentially purchasing consumption goods. The spending is first modified by
its effectiveness, due to civic engagement and other (unspecified but constant)
reasons:
S˜G,a,t = AG,a KCG,S,t ηCG,a SG,a,t
∀a, t
(137)
Note that spending directed at different household types may have different levels
of effectiveness due, for example, to lobbying:


The amount of consumption is defined by the effectiveness-adjusted amount of
spending on that final good or service and the price of it. Adjusted spending on
each type of consumption good is given by:

For investment, it is assumed the government gets “utility” from this investment
that they try to maximise. This utility is given by a Cobb-Douglas function:

In maximising utility, the government faces a budget constraint based on the overall
level of investment:

3.5 Aggregation for Society
While most variables in this model are intended primarily for use at a household
level, there are a number of situation where it is necessary or desirable to aggregate to an all-of-society level. This includes when households interact with
production or the government; when studying inequality and other interactions
between household types; and when looking at wellbeing for society as a whole.

3.5.1 General Aggregation
Most societal variables are defined as the weighted average of the value for each
household type:

3.5.2 Inequality

As this model has multiple household types, it is also possible to study the changes
in inequality between household types. The household types that are modelled are
determined by the modeller and the data they have available. In principle, each
household in the country could be modelled as a separate household type in this
framework. In practise, the data and computational power required for this degree
of disaggregation is not readily available. More likely, the modeller would choose a
small number of household types (say 5), divided along a dimension of interest.
This could be a demographic dimension like ethnicity or family structure; or it could
be a wellbeing dimension such as education level or income level. Note that if
households within a household type are not identical (and this will always be the
case if there are a small number of household types), the overall inequality will be
under-represented when just looking at the inequality between household types.
It is then necessary to decide what inequality should be considered. Commonly,
income inequality (and particularly gross income inequality) is studied, as the relevant statistical data is easiest to collect. Wealth inequality is also often considered
when appropriate data is available. Less frequently considered is inequality based
on other measures such as wellbeing, partly because there is little or no data available that can be used for this purpose. However, income, wealth, and wellbeing
inequality are all relevant in understanding the wellbeing and living standards of
a population. As such, the model calculates inequality measures for gross and
net income, household wealth, and wellbeing by default. It can also calculate
inequality based on any other variable that has different values for each household
type.
There are many different ways of measuring inequality, and each show different
things and take into account different values. Thus, it is useful to use more than
one measure. Some measures, however, cannot generally be calculated in the
model, such as the 80/20 ratio and other measures dependent on knowing value
at certain population percentiles. Measures that incorporate the whole population
can be calculated in this model, with the caveat that it only represents the inequality
between household types and ignores the inequality within household types. This
problem reduces as the number of household types increases, but increasing the
number of household types causes other problems, particularly around data and
computational complexity.
Perhaps the most famous whole-of-population measure is the Gini coefficient,
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

The Atkinson measure includes a parameter Υ that indicates aversion to inequality,
with larger values of Υ indicating a greater aversion to inequality.

3.6 Calculation of Indexes
In this model, variables are kept in their “natural units”. These are the units that
they are usually measured in, for example, New Zealand dollars for income, timeproportion for time (convertible to hours per day by multiplying by 24; or days per
year by multiplying by 365), and proportion for level of employment. This means
that each variable in the model has its own units, which may or may not be shared
with other variables.
Using natural units makes it easier to interpret the results, and it avoids problems
such as finding shadow prices to express all variables in dollar terms. Most of the
results in this model, including the most meaningful results, are calculated using
natural units. However, (although not important for the core model) we are left with
the challenge of how we compare different aspects of wellbeing in a meaningful
way. Which is bigger, if income has increased by $1,000 per year and leisure time
by 1 hour per day?
To get around this problem, all variables that are used as indicators of wellbeing
are calculated both in their natural units and as an index. The indexes can then be
compared to one another and used in calculations that combine them. This then
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

creates the next problem: How should the indexes be calculated?
There are many different ways indexes can be calculated, some of which are
discussed in an OECD handbook (OECD, 2008). For the purposes of this model,
there are some particular features that it would be desirable for the indexes to
exhibit, and some that are unimportant. The important features are as follows:

• Shows changes consistently over time: The variables in this model evolve
over time, and it is important to be able to tell how things are changing in
time.
• Shows differences between household types consistently: Different types of
households may respond to changes in different ways, and this needs to be
visible to compare the effects of wellbeing on the different household types.
• Both good and bad effects move in the same direction: Indexes are easier
to combine and interpret if up always means better. However, for some
variables such as pollution, an increase is a bad thing. For such variables,
the index should increase if the value of the variable decreases.
• Relative changes should only appear if there are also absolute changes:
This means the relative values should be calculated by comparing to fixed
values.
• Uses only data available in the model: Data from external sources can be
hard to come by for this model.

International comparability is unimportant for this model, as the results in this
model are only applied to one country, and no other country is calculating the
same thing. To calculate the indexes in this model, they are calculated as the
percentage improvement from a particular base value. Mathematically, this is
represented by:

The base VB is given by the societal value of that variable at time t = 0. In
the usual situation where the results of the model are given as the difference
between a business-as-usual case and a scenario, the base value will always be
the business-as-usual value at time t = 0. Using this method, an index value of
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

1 means the variable is the same as the base. An index value of 1.1 means the
variable is 10% better (not necessarily larger!) than the base; and an index value
of 0.9 means it is 10% worse than the base.
As a single base is used for all time periods, this method shows changes consistently over time. By using the same base for different household types, the
differences between them can be distinguished and are treated consistently. Because the inverse calculation is used for variables where an increase is bad for
wellbeing, an increase in the index always represents an increase in wellbeing.
The choice of a fixed base means changes in the index will only appear if the value
of the underlying variable changes. Finally, the choice of base described here is
calculated as a fundamental part of the model. Thus this method satisfies the
important features required for an index in this model.
It is worth noting however that using this method, all declines in wellbeing (relative
to the base) will result in an index between 0 and 1, while improvements in
wellbeing will have an index greater than 1 but not necessary smaller than 2, or 10,
or 100 or more. An index representing something that is half as good as the base
will have a value of 0.5, whereas something twice as good will have an index of 2.
This runs the risk that improvements in wellbeing appear overstated compared to
declines in wellbeing when using indexes, and is another reason why natural units
should be emphasised over index values. However, as the indexes are not used in
the core calculations of the model, this issues does not invalidate the model.
This method does have another significant weakness. No account is taken of the
level of variability in the value of the variable. Some variables have a large amount
of room to move and change, often with open-ended values e.g. income. Others
are more constrained, such as the percentage of good quality housing, and as well
as only being able to move between theoretical limits (e.g. 0% and 100%) may in
practise be even more constrained. This could be improved by including standard
deviation or some other measure of spread into the index calculation method, but
this would require data not available in the model, violating one of the important
criteria above.

3.7 Calculation of Wellbeing
Wellbeing is a heterogeneous concept, made up of many different aspects. Any
person or household will put a unique weighting on each aspect that may change
over time. Thus, many different indexes for wellbeing have been proposed (as
described in the introduction), but there is no “best” index for all people, or even a
large group of people. All such indexes require value judgements unique to any
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype

individual. For this reason, the emphasis on the model results should be on the
indexes for each aspect of wellbeing and the values that are used to calculate
them.
However, there is some value in calculating an overall value for wellbeing. In
particular, it can provide a consistent way for assessing different policies which
contain different trade-offs, provided the results are taken as approximate and the
reasons for the results understood.
The choice of mathematical form for combining the aspects of wellbeing is in many
respects arbitrary. However, it is desirable that it had diminishing increases in
wellbeing from increases in an aspect of wellbeing, and that any aspect reaching
zero is catastrophically bad. While a number of equational forms might meet these
criteria, we will chose a weighted geometric mean (a standard Cobb-Douglas-style
equation) for period wellbeing:


In addition to the overall wellbeing calculated for each time period, an intergenerational wellbeing value (i.e. wellbeing aggregated over time) can be calculated
to aid comparisons. People may be willing to sacrifice some wellbeing now for
greater wellbeing in the future, and consider their overall wellbeing throughout their
life to be greater for that sacrifice. Note however that intergenerational wellbeing
is even less meaningful than the overall period wellbeing calculated for equation
(151), as it retains all the problems of that value, then adds in the problems of time
discounting, which are also driven by value judgements unique to any individual.
Typically, good things in the future are rated less highly than good things now for a
number of reasons including the future is uncertain. This implies that the future is
discounted, and we assume it is discounted at a constant rate. We assume that
we can write intergenerational wellbeing as the discounted sum of the wellbeing in
each period. However, this does imply that the wellbeing of people in the distant
future is discounted to almost zero and therefore unimportant relative to now—
sometimes known as the dictatorship of the present. Chichilnisky (1997) proposes
a modification to the standard discount equation that corrects for this effect, by
adding a non-zero term in the limit t → ∞. Using this, the intergenerational
wellbeing (in terms of period wellbeing) is given by:

An alternative method that prevents the dictatorship of the present and may bear a
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype


closer relationship to reality is hyperbolic discounting, where the discount rate βhS
is not constant over time but instead depends on how far away a given time period
is from the current time period.



Conclusions

In summary, this paper presents the first prototype of a model of wellbeing. This
model is designed to support policy development and decisions in New Zealand by
providing a tool for thinking about changes in aspects of wellbeing including tradeoffs and synergies for policies. It does this by modelling the linkages between the
eleven aspects of wellbeing used by the OECD in their How’s Life? framework, in
combination with a small general equilibrium model and stock-and-flow equations.
A model of this nature is a new addition to the policy modelling toolkit.
It is clear that this model, perhaps more than most, has many flaws and unrealistic
assumptions. However, it is the first attempt at such a model, and its existence
has several uses. Firstly, it shows that such a model is possible, and with a level of
complexity that, if not low, is low enough to be manageable and no higher than
many CGE (computable general equilibrium) models used for policy purposes.
Secondly, it provides a basis for criticism and improvement. It is far easier to
criticise that which exists, than build a model from scratch; and from constructive
criticism the model can evolve into one that is much better than the current model or
another built from scratch. Third, despite its flaws, it is useful for policy analysis as
it provides a tool for thinking about the trade-offs and synergies between different
aspects of wellbeing and policy that currently does not exist.
Given the prototype nature of the model described in this paper, there is clearly
room for significant further work. The model and the results it gives should undergo
serious critical analysis to understand how the model behaves, what assumptions
are critical, and where the model gives unrealistic and unhelpful results. These
results will help inform where (and how) improvements to the model can be made
and where they will be most important.
Some improvements and extensions to the model can easily be identified now. To
bring the model into alignment with the current version of the Living Standards
Framework a culture aspect of wellbeing will need to be added. Both employment and household consumption are exogenous in this version of the model, but
in reality are driven largely by factors inside the model, such as income levels.
Housing is treated as a consumption good, but house prices (particularly pertinent
for Auckland) and the housing aspect of wellbeing in general will be better represented if it is treated as a durable good. Including demographics in the model will
WP18/05 Living Standards Analysis Model: The First Prototype enlarge the range of policies it can be used for and allow a better understanding of
sustainability in all its forms. Other improvements and extensions will be identified
through disseminating this work widely and further study of the literature in the
fields represented by each aspect of wellbeing and supporting parts of the model.
Data will be a challenge for this model, as it requires a large number of parameters
and initial values. Many of these (especially the standard economic values) are
available from Stats NZ and other appropriate sources; or can be calibrated from
such data. Others may need to be proxied from international data, and some will
be unavailable from reliable sources. All will need to be tested with sensitivity
analyses, and for those that are completely unavailable this will be crucial. Note
that as results will often be given qualitatively and relative to a baseline, the results
might not be as sensitive to the parameters as might be expected at first. However,
these data challenges need to be explored further before we can have confidence
that we can use a computable version of the model.
As with all models, this model can be used and it can be abused. Models (and
especially this one) are used well when they are used as a tool for thinking and
for testing assumptions. They are abused when the results of a single model are
used with spurious precision to produce the “right” answer without regard to the
assumptions in the model. More specifically, if this model is used to create a chain
of logic to explore the aspects of wellbeing that will be affected by a policy, it will be
used appropriately. If it is used to make a precise numerical prediction of the effect
on wellbeing of a given policy, it will be being abused. However, calculating values
to represent the complex interactions between the different aspects of wellbeing
makes it easier to determine the qualitative results of the model, and so are an
important part of the process.
There is also much to learn about policy by applying the model. Without a model
of this type, the second and third and higher order effects (particularly those in
different policy areas to the original) are very difficult to anticipate or attribute to
their original cause. This model allows all those effects to be recognised, as well as
obtain some understanding of how significant they are. For example, if an increase
in health spending by the government is modelled, the model results indicate
a small negative effect on the natural environment could occur. This is not an
intuitively obvious result, but tracing through the model logic and results shows it is
not a spurious result: more health spending results in better health, better health
results in higher productivity, higher productivity results in more consumption and
production, more production results (all else equal) in more pollution and therefore
a poorer natural environment. This is a chain of impacts that is too long for most
people to perform mentally without the aid of a model, but the consequences could be important. Any of the parameters and exogenous variables in the model
can be shocked by a policy change. Shocks can also be added to many other
variables, especially the investment variables (for example, the destruction of
government-owned physical capital by the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake).
The model can be used for both single policies and for policy packages. In the
case of policy packages, it can be used to see how the effects of different policies
balance each other out. It can also be used to help determine which policies
should be included in a package. It helps this in two ways. Firstly, it provides a
consistent framework for policies from different fields, e.g. education and health, to
be compared with each other and in a broader way than tools such as cost-benefit
analysis allow. Secondly, policies can be chosen on their ability to mitigate some of
the undesirable trade-offs (such as the negative environmental effects of a health
policy) inherent in the choice of policies that are the cornerstones of a package.
As mentioned at the beginning of this paper, Sen said “It is possible to be at once
deeply appreciative and seriously critical of a theory” (2009, p.58). This paper
describes a model that, as a prototype, has many flaws but provides a framework
for improvement. The author expects, and invites, serious criticism of this model;
but also hopes that the step forward it represents can be appreciated and is useful.