
1 Introduction
Nowadays, logistics collaboration has emerged a strategy
individuals and organizations apply to gain beneﬁts which
they can hardly achieve when working individually. In
particular, logistics collaboration helps to mitigate most
inefﬁciencies managers encounter in their daily undertakings. Such inefﬁciencies include poor capacity utilization,
empty backhaul, high transport costs, low-proﬁt margins,
and harsh environmental impacts [1]. Equally, according to
Wang and Kopfer [2], logistics collaboration helps smalland medium-sized companies to reduce costs, while
increasing operational efﬁciency. In spite of these beneﬁts,
logistics collaboration encounters many challenges
including partner search and selection, as well as trust
management.
Academia and practitioners acknowledge that lack of
trust hinders collaboration. Coincident to [3–5], lack of


trust is a potential barrier to logistics collaboration. Graham [6] observed that lack of trust makes collaboration a
difﬁcult proposition to many companies. Such difﬁculties
have largely been ampliﬁed by cloud computing, which is
continuously elevating collaborative networks (CNs) to a
new level. Essentially, cloud computing and related technologies have transformed social–physical interaction
systems, from traditional context to networked society.
This transformation, on the one hand, supports global scale
interaction of collaborating partners. On the other hand,
emerged networked society has raised up difﬁculties on
trust management. Illustratively, Falcone and Castelfranchi
[7] have emphasized that success of computer-supported
society in which humans cope with new kind of environments, procedures, and interactions is mainly dependent on
trust and conﬁdence. To that end, realizing trust a critical
ingredient to logistics collaboration has become most
imperative. Nevertheless, Ireland and Webb [8] have
maintained that trust can build arrangements whereby ﬁrms
contribute a minimum amount of resources to collaboratively achieve efﬁciency.
The remainder of the paper is structured in six sections.
Section 2 presents a background on trust and behavioral
uncertainties in CNs. Section 3 describes the state of the art
and objectives of this review, while Sect. 4 presents a
methodology this research applies. In Sect. 5, analysis and
identiﬁcation of issues inﬂuencing logistics collaboration and
partner trust are presented. In Sect. 6, key behavioral factors
and criteria are discussed and formalized. Finally, conclusion,
implications, and outlook are provided in Sect. 7.

2 Background
Trust is studied in various disciplines like psychology,
sociology, economics, computer science, and engineering.
This multidisciplinary loop signiﬁes how trust is critical to
human life, especially upon considering countless interactions humans engage in. As trust is a multidisciplinary
construct, its generalized theory remains unreached. As a
consequence, deﬁnitions of trust in the literature are plentiful, largely compounded with contexts speciﬁc to applications. In computer science, according to Robinson et al.
[9], trust has a context of security concerning the conﬁdentiality, availability, and integrity of data or information.
In social relational exchanges, trust has a form of reputation whose aim is to deny betrayal aversion. In economics,
trust is associated with rational choices against risks.
Alongside aforementioned contexts, the following are
some of the trust deﬁnitions proposed in the literature.
According to Gambetta [10], trust is the probability perceived by a trustor that a trustee will do something.
According to Mayer et al. [11], trust is a willingness of a




party to be vulnerable to actions of another party based on
the expectation that other party will perform a particular
action important to the trustor, irrespective of ability to
monitor or control that other party. Rousseau et al. [12]
deﬁne trust as a psychological state comprising the intention to accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the intentions or behavior of another. Nevertheless,
according to Clark et al. [13], trust is the willingness of a
party to accept perceived vulnerability to the actions of
another party based on the expectation that the other has
the ability, benevolence, and integrity to perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the
ability to monitor or control that other party.
Concordant to CNs requirements, some deﬁnitions have
limitations, while others are moderately adequate. The
deﬁnition proposed by Rousseau et al. [12] poses a difﬁcult
in operationalizing psychological measurements even
though remaining deﬁnitions emphasize on the willingness
of the trustor–party to rely on the expectation that trustee–
party will act fairly. While willingness sounds to be more
of psychology, in CNs, partner trust can better be described
and represented under aspects of assurance, reliability, or
conﬁdence. To that end, consistent with trust deﬁnitions in
[11, 13] and context speciﬁc to CNs, the following deﬁnition is adapted. That trust is a level of conﬁdence trustor–
party develops in trustee–party based on the expectation
that trustee–party will perform a particular action necessary
to trustor–party, irrespective of the ability to monitor or
control trustee–party. This deﬁnition emphasizes more on a
speciﬁc level of conﬁdence, developed by a partner during
trusting decisions. The deﬁnition applies to both, individual
and organizational relationships. Partner trust applied to
organizational relationships is referred to as the inter-organizational trust. According to Krishnan and Martin [14],
inter-organizational trust is the expectation held by one
ﬁrm that another will not exploit its vulnerabilities. This
expectation, however, is uneasily achievable due to different behavioral uncertainties and resulting vulnerabilities.
In logistics collaboration, behavioral uncertainties contribute to the lack of trust. Such uncertainties can consistently be interpreted in accordance with Pfeffer and
Salancik [15] as a degree to which future states of the
world are difﬁcult to anticipate and accurately predict. This
difﬁculty makes an action to trust and decision making
harder, but also uncertain. Decision-making uncertainty,
according to Achrol and Stern [16], is operationalized to
comprise of three concepts: (1) adequacy of available
information from all sources; (2) predictability of the
consequences of these decisions; and (3) the degree of
conﬁdence of the decision maker. Whereas information
availability is limited, a difﬁculty in predicting trustee–
party’s actions and interactions increases. As a result,
attribute to opportunism [17] and are negatively and highly
associated with ﬁrms’ trust in supply chain relationships
[18]. Thus, building on these arguments, it is claimed that
level of trust can be increased by minimizing behavioral
uncertainties. This claim is concordant to Cao and Zhang
[19] who argue that logistics collaboration needs trust
based rationalism that employs behavioral assumption of
trustworthiness, fair play, and responsibility.

3 Partner trust: the state of the art
In the past and of recent, several publications have
appeared to address trust under various domains of applications. Illustratively, in a CNs arena, roles and necessity
of trust to overcome opportunism, selﬁsh and alliance
failure [20–23] have been examined. Measurement of trust
[24–26], as well as partner selection strategies [27, 28], has
been proposed even though Huang and Wilkinson [29]
have afﬁrmed that more literature on trust research has
largely been of historical, processual, and contextual. They
have additionally maintained in [30] that existing works
have been static, cross-sectional, survey-based studies
designed to develop and test variable-based correlational
models in which time and process are least considered. As
such, longitudinal investigations involving partners’ trusting behaviors (actions and interactions) and respective
performance are limited. This limitation is compounded
with studying trust in the absence of a real problem, by
which partners’ trusting behaviors can be investigated. To
overcome this, among others, it initially requires establishing behavioral factors which inﬂuence trust in logistics
collaboration.
The literature has drawn the least attention to investigating behavioral factors and their consequences on partner
trust. Factors affecting supply chain collaboration (SCC)
[31] and level of trust [18] have been addressed. Equally,
antidotes to dysfunctional behaviors, namely information
sharing, decision synchronization, and incentive alignments [32], have been proposed. Together, these works
contribute to requirements of functional supply chain and
logistics collaboration. Beyond these requirements, trust
difﬁculties resulting from uncertain behavioral aspects
remain rarely investigated. Nevertheless, trust reviews in
[33, 34] have emphasized on trust context and models,
leaving out behavioral aspects. In essence, building trust in
logistics collaboration may involve identifying behavioral
factors and their inﬂuential mechanisms. Motivated by this
need therefore, this review establishes behavioral factors
inﬂuencing partner trust in the operational phase of logistics collaboration. The review fulﬁlls three objectives: (1)
establishing behavioral factors inﬂuencing logistics

Page 3 of 11

19

collaboration; (2) establishing how these factors inﬂuence
partner trust; and (3) articulating criteria attributing to each
factor.

4 Methodology
A systematic literature review (SLR) is applied to synthesize a new perspective on behavioral factors inﬂuencing
partner trust. Appropriateness of SRL rests on its ability to
bring together existing and relevant evidence-based studies
[35], but also identifying key scientiﬁc contributions on a
concerned topic [36]. Concordant to Denyer and Neely
[37], SLR details how a study is conducted, thus inducing
transparency and unbiasedness, and enabling readers to
draw a reasonable and relevant conclusion. Moreover,
according to Thorpe et al. [35], SLR offers broad coverage
by applying systematic strings and protocols within
sophisticated electronic databases.
4.1 Review protocol
This SLR follows stages proposed in [36], namely planning
a review, conducting a review, and reporting and dissemination. Planning involves identifying, analyzing, and
synthesizing behavioral factors inﬂuencing logistics collaboration and partner trust. It employs SCC and trust as
topics. Correspondingly, ﬁve electronic databases to search
in Science Direct, Wiley Online Library, Emerald,
Springer, and IEEE are selected. These databases contain
rich publications in the areas of logistics, supply chain,
collaboration, and trust. Concurrent to a search process, a
search strategy applies general and speciﬁc queries. General query is a form of a search question containing all
search terms in one search string under single execution.
The speciﬁc query contains few search terms executable sequentially under multiple options. General query
is applied to databases supporting expert search, while the
speciﬁc query is applied to remaining databases.
In conducting the review, three main search terms/
phrases identiﬁed are factors, ‘‘inter-organizational trust,’’
and ‘‘supply chain collaboration.’’ The terms are further
expanded by including alternative and/or related terms, as
well as by applying wildcard and truncation. In particular,
the search:
•

•

Term ‘‘factors’’ is expressed as impediments, impacts,
barriers, challenges, uncertainties, and affecting. On
applying wildcards, these search terms are expressed as
factor*, imped*, impact*, barrier*, challeng*, uncertaint*, and affect*;
Phrase ‘‘inter-organizational trust’’ is expressed as
trust and ‘‘inter-ﬁrm trust.’’ Applying truncation to the


Page 4 of 11

search terms results in ‘‘organization’’ as
‘‘organi?ation’’;
Phrase ‘‘supply chain collaboration’’ is expressed as
collaboration, cooperation, ‘‘collaborative logistics,’’
‘‘cooperative logistics,’’ ‘‘collaborative supply chain,’’
‘‘cooperative supply chain,’’ ‘‘collaborative transportation,’’ ‘‘cooperative transportation,’’ ‘‘collaborative planning,’’ and ‘‘cooperative planning.’’ On applying
wildcard, these search phrases are expressed as collaborat*, cooperat*, ‘‘collaborat* logistics,’’ ‘‘cooperat*
logistics,’’ ‘‘collaborat* supply chain,’’ ‘‘cooperat* supply chain,’’ ‘‘collaborat* transport*,’’ ‘‘cooperat* transport*,’’ ‘‘collaborat* plan*,’’ and ‘‘cooperat* plan*.’’

Subsequently, two main search queries are formulated.
The ﬁrst query includes a trust as search term, while the
second query excludes it. Whereas results of the second
query are likely duplicates, the intention is to capture
factors which affect trust indirectly.
4.2 Search process and results
The search is executed in outlined databases using 20
search terms, resulting in a total of 2445 articles published
between 2001 and 2015 inclusively. Firstly, the search
process is executed by concentrating more on title, abstract,
and keywords of articles. This concentration is preferred
because body contents of articles are least speciﬁc to outlined topics compared to those in title, abstract, and keywords. Subsequently, inclusion and exclusion criteria are
applied to screen actual relevance of articles. Beginning
with practical screening, relevant articles are included
based on how their titles, abstracts, and keywords address
trust, inter-organizational systems, and supply chain and
logistics collaboration. This screening ﬁlters previously
2445 articles obtained to 214 articles. Practical screening is
followed by a methodological screening. Methodological
screening emphasizes on the validity of research design,
validity and reliability of data sources, and contextual
meaning to the research subject. Additional to these criteria, articles which do not discuss impact/inﬂuence of supply chain, logistics, or performance on collaboration and/or
trust are excluded. This screening is conducted by scrutinizing body contents of 214 articles. Finally, a total of 34
relevant articles (Table 1) are obtained.

5 Analysis and identiﬁcation of issues inﬂuencing
partner trust
Concerning partner trust in logistics collaboration, initial
analysis of the literature reveals a total of ten issues
(Table 2). However, despite an extent to which each issue




is relevant, further analysis concentrating on behavioral
perspective is conducted. The behavioral perspective centers on issues encompassing diverse set of partner’s actions
and interactions which feature during collaboration. Thus,
along this perspective, each issue is brieﬂy analyzed to
establish a rationale whether it constitutes behavioral perspective or not.
Beginning with commitment, Morgan and Hunt [61]
have deﬁned relationship commitment as an exchange
partner who believes that the ongoing relationship is worth
working on to ensure that it endures indeﬁnitely. Commitment is a key to social exchanges among collaborating
parties even though a fundamental enquiry is whether
commitment inﬂuences trust or trust inﬂuences commitment. In [18, 27], they established a positive relationship
between trust level and degree of commitment, positing that
trust inﬂuences commitment. Conversely, Seppanen et al.
[62] have considered trusting a reciprocal construct, since it
is both, a cause and partly an effect. Henceforth, on the one
hand, the existence of trust can lead entities to develop more
commitment. On the other hand, when entities perceive the
existence of commitment, they even trust more. Contextual
to logistics collaboration and in line with [18, 27], proposedly, trust inﬂuences commitment. This proposition is
built on a consideration that, under normal interactive cues,
entities have to establish trust before they get committed.
Therefore, commitment is considered the least factor that
can inﬂuence partner behaviors and trust.
The capability is mainly applied during partner search
and selection. The capability is described by Tejpal et al.
[33] as competence or work standard, skill, knowledge, and
ability required to fulﬁll a promise, agreement, or obligation. In CNs, required capability is determined depending
on collaboration stages, outlined in Pomponi et al. [3] as
operational, tactical, and strategic. Particular to a theorybased framework in [3], each stage requires distinct mutual
trust founded on appropriate theory. While behavioral
uncertainties are dominantly in operational stage and least
aligned to partner search and selection, qualifying capability as behavioral perspective is inappropriate.
Information sharing and communication appear wellknown issues in relation to collaboration and trust.
According to Simatupang and Sridharan [58], information
sharing is an act of capturing and disseminating timely and
relevant information for decision makers to plan and control chain operations. Similarly, Cao and Zhang [42]
deﬁned communication as contact and message transmission process among partners in terms of frequency, direction, mode, and inﬂuence strategy. A critical enquiry is
whether information sharing and/or communication can
inﬂuence collaboration and trust. In the creation of the
¨
trust, Kottila and Ronni [63] claimed that high frequency of

19

Table 1 Thematic description of articles reviewed
Article

Journal

Domain

Study type

Main focus

[38]

Logistics and SCM

Transportation

Theoretical

Chances and challenges of collaborative transport planning

[39]

Ind Market Manag

Retailing

Survey

Role of inter-organizational information system (IOIS) integration

[30]

J Bus Mark Manag

Business

Case study

Conceptualize trust dimensions, processes, and determinants in
business relationships

[23]

Inform Manage

Manufacturing

Survey

Factors inﬂuencing information sharing and implementation
collaboration

[40]

Oper Manag

Supply chain

Review

A typology of supply chain conﬁgurations

[41]

Soc Behav Sci

Resource
clustering

Survey and
case study

Examining the level of sharing matters generally and in a speciﬁc
cluster

[42]

Oper Manag

Manufacturing

Survey

Nature of SCC and its impact on performance

[43]

Purchasing & Supply
Manage

Manufacturing

Survey

The construct of supply chain relationship quality and its inﬂuence on
cooperation

[44]

WiCOM

Supply chain

Survey

Factors which inﬂuence SCC

[45]

Computers and Industrial
Engineering

Manufacturing

Survey

Impact of trust, asset speciﬁcity, and environmental uncertainty on the
level of collaborative processes

[46]

Manag Sci Eng Manag

Supply chain

Survey

Dynamic dissimilar role of information sharing on dynamic trust and
cooperation

[47]

System Sciences

Consumers

Survey

Antecedents of inter-organizational information sharing

[18]

Suppl Chain Manage

Supply chain

Survey

Empirical testing of a relationship between trust and commitment

[19]

Chapter in book

Manufacturing

Survey

Nature and characteristics, antecedents, and consequences of SCC

[23]

Comp Stand Inter

Supply chain

Survey

Role of information sharing, quality, and availability of trust in
collaboration

[48]

PhD Thesis

Logistics

Experiment

Feasible collaboration model and mechanisms for horizontal logistics

[49]

PhD Thesis

Transport
logistics

Case study and
survey

Identiﬁcation and exploration of components of horizontal cooperation
in logistics

[6]

Technical Report

Transportation

Report

Barriers and beneﬁts of transport collaboration

[22]

Chapter in book

Supply chain

Simulation

Trust loop and its effect on performance

[50]

Research Report

Transportation

Survey

[51]

Management
Development

Supply chain

Review

Understanding and developing less-than-truckload collaborative
paradigms
An integrated conceptual trust building model for supply chain
collaboration

[33]

Measuring Business
Excellence

Supply chain

Review

Development of a context-dependent, multi-perspective and multilevel
concepts of trust

[52]

Assembly Autom

Supply chain

Review

A review of the fundamental concept of collaborative supply chain

[53]

Qualitative Market
Research

Supply chain

Explanatory

Understanding meanings, determinants and manifestations of trust in
supply chains

[54]

White paper

Transportation

Descriptive
analysis

Collaborative transportation management concepts, beneﬁts and
business case

[55]

Marketing and Logistics

Supply chain

Survey

The ﬁt of the commitment–trust theory and exploration of the supply
chain relationships

[56]

Prod Plan Control

Supply chain

Review and
case study

Analysis of collaborative motives and mechanisms of building
partnerships

[31]

Social & Behavioral
Sciences

Supply chain

Review

Factors affecting collaboration in supply chain

[57]

Benchmarking

Supply chain

Survey

Facets of supply chain trust and its multi-faceted measure

[32]

Lect Notes Comput Sc

Supply chain

Review

Examining supply chain discontent in an integrative way

[58]

Int J Phys Distrib

Supply chain

Survey

An instrument to measure the extent of collaboration in a supply chain

[59]

Logistics Management

Supply chain

Theoretical

Examining managerial inertia which prevents the effective functioning
of chain members

[60]

Chapter in book

Logistics

Theoretical

Contributions to collaborative logistics: Opportunities and main
coalition issues

[27]

Business and Information

Transportation

Survey

Exploring partner selection criteria during collaboration formation
stage



Table 2 Main issues arising from the literature
No.

Issues

Articles

Deﬁnition

1

Commitment

[22, 44, 53, 57, 64]

An exchange partner believing that an ongoing relationship with another
is so important as to warrant maximum efforts at maintaining it [61]

2

Capability

[33, 51, 53]

The members’ competence or work standard, skill, knowledge, and ability
to fulﬁll a promise, agreement, or obligation [33]

3

Information
sharing

[18, 23, 31, 32, 42, 46, 47, 53–55, 58, 64]

The act of capturing and disseminating timely and relevant information
for decision makers to plan and control supply chain operations [32]

4

Communication

[42, 43]

The contact and message transmission process among supply chain
partners in terms of frequency, direction, and mode [42]

5

Asset
speciﬁcity

[18, 45]

Transaction-speciﬁc investments involving physical or human assets that
are dedicated to a particular relationship and cannot be redeployed easily
[65]

6

Resource
sharing

[42]

The process of leveraging capabilities and assets and investing in
capabilities and assets with supply chain partners [42]

7

Joint
knowledge
creation

[42]

The extent to which supply chain partners develop a better understanding
of and response to the market and competitive environment by working
together [42, 66]

8

Incentive
alignment

[32, 38, 42, 48–50, 56, 59]

The process of sharing costs, risks, and beneﬁts among supply chain
partners [31]

9

Bargaining
power

[18, 32, 44, 48, 49, 57, 64]

The ability of a person, group, or organization to exert inﬂuence over
another party in order to inﬂuence the outcome of the negotiation and to
achieve a favorable deal [48]

10

Opportunism

[22, 31, 33, 38, 40, 44, 49, 52, 55, 57]

A particular form of inconsistency of purpose, involving disclosure of
incomplete/misleading information, especially calculated efforts to
mislead, distort, disguise, confuse, or cause confusion [22]

this viewpoint, partner behaviors can better be described
and represented from the perspective of information sharing than communication.
Asset speciﬁcity, resource sharing, and joint knowledge
creation are necessary issues in collaboration. According to
Heide [65], asset speciﬁcity is a transaction-speciﬁc investment involving physical or human assets, dedicated to a
particular relationship and which cannot be redeployed
easily. According to Cao and Zhang [42], resource sharing
refers to the process of leveraging capabilities and assets and
investing in capabilities and assets with supply chain partners. Essentially, these concepts drive entities to collaborate,
when underlying resources are difﬁcult to redeploy. Moreover, Cao and Zhang [42] and Malhotra et al. [66] explained
joint knowledge creation as the extent to which supply chain
partners develop a better understanding of and response to
the market and competitive environment by working together. Examining these issues together, asset speciﬁcity and
resource sharing are least related to partner behaviors but an
investment. As such, it is inappropriate to represent partner
behaviors in the perspective of investment. Concerning joint
knowledge, while partner behaviors are dominant in operational stage, joint knowledge creation focuses more on
strategic stage. Equally, it is inappropriate to qualify joint
knowledge creation under behavioral perspective.
Incentive alignment, bargaining power, and opportunism
are widely stated in the literature as major issues inﬂuencing



collaboration and trust. In line with Hudnurkar [31], incentive alignment concerns the allocation of costs, risks, and
beneﬁts among partners. Xu [48] has discussed bargaining
power as the ability of a party to exert inﬂuence over another
party and inﬂuence the outcome of the negotiation. Moreover, Ouzrout et al. [22] refer to opportunism as a particular
form of the inconsistency of purpose. These three issues are
key to logistics collaboration, and they represent diverse
aspects by which partner behaviors can be described.

6 Discussions
This section synthesizes and subsequently presents detailed
discussions on selected behavioral factors which inﬂuence
logistics collaboration and partner trust. Subsequent to brief
analysis in Sect. 5, discussions are categorized under four
behavioral themes: information sharing, incentive alignment, decision synchronization, and opportunism (Table 3).
6.1 Information sharing
Information sharing denotes an information exchange. This
exchange, according to Madlberger [47] is a voluntary
activity dominated largely by internal considerations. As
such, understanding criteria which inﬂuence behavioral

19

Table 3 Summary of behavioral factors and criteria inﬂuencing partner trust in logistics collaboration

