Before the second part of the twentieth century, the development of the economy and the
society were deeply influenced by the intensive use of the available natural resources, with
a direct impact on the environment. These effects, out of which some are irreversible, led
those involved to believe of the need to rethink the way the economy works, by considering
the effects induced to the future generations. At this point, the debates on sustainable
development were created and refined, the concept of sustainable development being
defined by the United Nations as the development that meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs (UN, 1987).
The three components of the sustainable development (economic growth, social inclusion
and environmental protection) aim to provide the pre-conditions for states’ welfare and for
their citizens, by eradicating the poverty, raising the living standards, reducing the social
inequalities or by implementing global management tools and methods for the natural
resources. The global nature of the sustainable development concept was envisaged by the
September 2015 United Nations summit, when the 2030 Agenda was adopted (UN, 2015).
This key document was meant to attain very ambitious goals, such as eradicating poverty
and famine, assure the access to education and medical services and protection of the
environment by 2030, considered fundamentals for the sustainable development.
These initiatives, supported by the European Union since the beginning of the XXI century,
were and still are central for the European Commission, which works for devising and
implementing the needed measures to attain the 2030 Agenda. In this respect, at the end of
2016, the European Commission communicated the initiatives for implementing the 2030
Agenda, that include the sustainable development goals among its current priorities, and
launching the debate over a much longer term, emphasizing the sectorial development
starting 2020 (Bourguigon, 2016).
The transition from the present economy, characterized by linearity (based on extensive use
of the natural resources, that impacts the environment and produces waste), towards the
circular economy is envisaged by the European Commission. This process may lead to
waste reduction and keeping a larger part and for longer time the value of the products, raw
materials or resources within the production cycle (European Commission, 2017a). The
legislative package that relates to the circular economy, as presented by the European
Commission, contains the action plan and the list of all proposals amending the actual legal
frame (Bourguigon, 2016). The European Commission initiative has been adopted by the
member states, such as the Netherlands and Finland, which have already published their
strategies for transition towards the circular economy, by 2050 (Prime Minister's Office,
2015; Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, 2016). Moreover, in December 2017,
Bulgaria announced that some of its EU Presidency priorities are the circular economy and
eco-innovation initiatives (European Commission, 2017b).
Using the most comprehensive data set for the EU’s member states, the article provides an
independent view on the implementation of the circular economy and an input for this new
research field. The obtained results are important for the EU and member states’ decision
makers, that are involved in framing the rules and regulations needed for the transition
towards circular economy, in order to identify the necessary measures to maximize the
outcomes. Also, the results reveal the effects these measures may have on the economic

accordingly its own development strategies.
The article contains 5 parts, the first listing the reasons for the selected subject, the second
presenting the main results from the relevant scientific literature; the third and fourth
discussing the methodology and the obtained results; the conclusions, the limits and
possible future developments are summarized in the fifth part.

1. Review of the scientific literature
The circular economy concept gains relevance not only for the economists, but also for
other researchers and practitioners, interested in finding and implementing the mechanisms
that lead to worldwide sustainability (Ghisellini, Cialani and Ulgiati, 2016). Starting from
conclusions of the 2012’s Rio+20 Conference, which focused on the ecological economic
growth, Bartelmus (2013) considers that the sustainable development is a concept that has
to be defined globally and not individually, as it relates to the ecological, economic and
social sustainable development.
We consider that the circular economy concept is related to the sustainable development, as
the latter is the result of the activities that simultaneously and in equilibrium involve all
economic, social, environmental and technological aspects within an economy (Ghisellini,
Cialani and Ulgiati, 2016).The circular economy concept was defined by Pearce and Turner
(1990), who criticized the traditional model for economic development, proposing the
transition towards circular economy, using a model that emphasizes the environment’s
economic functions. Preston (2012) asserts that the circular economy is a process by which
waste from the production activities becomes input for other production cycles. The French
Environmental Agency defines the circular economy as an exchange and production system
that occurs within the lifetime of a product, in order to increase the efficiency of resources’
use, as well as reducing the impact on environment (Agence de l'Environnement et de la
Maîtrise de l'Énergie, 2014).
The evolutions in the circular economy conceptualization were considered also by Sauvé,
Bernard şi Sloan (2016), which emphasize the obstacles in implementing the circular
economy mechanisms, such as finding the technological solutions for minimizing the total
ecological cost, but – especially – the changes in the consumer’s behavior. The change in
the consumer’s behavior, as a prerequisite for implementing the circular economy, has been
analyzed by Bratianu (2017) and is facilitated by the transition from the linear to nonlinear
thinking and, furthermore, towards the dynamic thinking.
A comparative analysis of the circular economy concepts was provided by Ghisellini,
Cialani and Ulgiati (2016), who identified the notable differences in their implementation
throughout the world. As in China the circular economy is part of the political strategy of
the Chinese government, in the European Union, United States of America and Japan it is a
concept that is limited to waste management and environment protection. Therefore, new
concepts related to the circular economy appeared, such as the eco-efficiency, eco-design,
natural capitalism, ecological industry etc., that intend to realize the transformation and use
of the natural resources in such a manner as to maintain and preserve the ecologic
equilibrium and the economic growth (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2012).

EU’s dependence on imports of raw-materials from all over the world. In order to assess the
EU’s independence relative to imports of raw materials from outside the EU, Eurostat
defined the EU self-sufficiency for raw materials (EUROSTAT, 2017b), whose evolution in
2016 is presented in Figure no.1. This indicator considers the ratio of the net import of raw
materials and the apparent consumption (that is defined as the internal production, corrected
by the net import). Using this indicator, the largest dependence is for natural graphite,
where the indicator has the lowest value from the considered raw materials. The largest
independence is on limestone, where the indicator is close to one.

15.6

Vanadium
2.3

Platinum
Lithium

0.6

Germanium

36.2
97.1

14.5
35.9

Fluorspar
17.5

Copper

56.4

65.8

30.3
25.7

68.2

36.4

Aluminium
0

20

40

60

80

100

Figure no. 1 EU self-sufficiency for raw materials (%), 2016
Source: own computation, EUROSTAT
Sana (2014) shows that the circular economy is leading to economic growth, estimating that
as much as 630 billion euros per year could be saved in Europe from a more efficient use of
resources. Moreover, more work places could be delivered if the resource productivity
increased by 30% until 2030. In this context, the circular economy can reduce the pressures
on the environment, especially by increasing the spending in the research and innovation
fields (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013). But looking at the circular economy only by
considering the positive effects is not a solution, as the circular economy has both
technological and economic limits. For example, a study conducted on the Chinese city of
Guiyang revealed that the short term positive results of the circular economy are not
guaranteed and this process can also have negative effects on economic growth (Sana, 2014).
The Chinese economy transition from the present state to the circular economy is also
central for a large number of researchers (Su and al., 2013, Pauliuk, Wang and Müller,
2012; Yuan, Bi and Moriguichi, 2006. In China, government’s strategy of implementing the
circular economy based on three pillars: a production that is environmentally friendly,
industrial ecology and ecological modernization. As such, using a legislative package
adopted in 2003, the polluting companies are required to audit their production activities, in
order to assess the impact on the environment (Yuan, Bi and Moriguichi, 2006).
In France, the legislative framework for the circular economy was created starting from
2013, (Le Moigne, 2014), and from 2015 it was integrated into the fiscal laws, the aim
being to reduce the economic activities’ impact on the climate. Also in Germany, a focal
point is on the efficient use of the resources. The results of some studies, (such as Rouquet
authorities had as a main target maintaining the correlation between the economic growth
and the resource utilization. Bonciu (2014) provides an analysis of the way the circular
economy concept was applied across the European Union, outlining two examples of
European companies that follow mechanisms specific to the circular economy (Renault and
Philips), where measures meant to optimize the entire production process, and not only
some components, were adopted.
Starting from the fact that the natural resources are at large exhaustible, Sørensen (2017)
proposed a model to find the optimal recycling rate for the polluting raw materials and
municipal waste. The author proved that the extensive exploitation of the natural resources
can be contained by imposing a Pigouvian tax on non-recycling materials, whose value is
equal to the present value of the environmental marginal cost of used materials.
Considering the environmental taxes in Europe, it was shown that 20 countries use taxes on
waste that led to an increase in the fiscal revenues during 2009-2010 by 2.1 billion EUR
that reveals also the openness of the governments towards this new economic model
(European Environment Agency, 2012). Stahel (2013) considers that, in order to obtain the
requirements of a sustainable and circular economy, it is necessary to impose taxes on nonrenewables and suspend any subsidies on them. Nazet-Allouche (2016) shows that, in 2012,
the ecologic fiscal measures are not well represented, considering the case of France, where
the proportion in GDP of the environmental taxes is below the European average of 2.6%.
Another study realized by an expert group (The Ex' Tax project and al, 2016) shows that
the European tax system influences the new economic model, as the level of the
environmental taxes in the total taxes does not exceed 6%, when more than 50% are from
taxes on labor and social contributions.
In our opinion, all the studies on circular economy focused mainly in one country or on a
specific economic field, showing the evolutions in the implementation of this concept.
Moreover, intense debates on the circular economy concepts still persist among researchers,
in terms of the coverage area or the relationship with some other concepts, such as the
sustainable development concept.

2. Research methodology
In this study, we evaluate the impact of some circular economy concepts on the classical
macroeconomic variables. First of all, the resource productivity is a fundamental concept
for the circular economy, that relates to the finding of necessary measures to maintain the
natural resources and inputs within the economic cycle as long as possible (Hu et al., 2011).
Out of the variables that define the circular economy concept, we use the resource
productivity that is the ratio of GDP and domestic material consumption. As a measure to
reinsert used materials in the productive activity, we use the recycle rate of the packaging
waste. Also, we consider the biowaste that is raw material for compost in agriculture.
The positive impact of the biowaste recycling is outlined by Bastein et al. (2013), that
evaluate the value of these inputs reinserted in the agriculture (by 2013) to a total amount of
3.5 billion euros, estimated to increase with one more billion euros (by producing biogas or
enhancing the recycling process). As such, the biowaste was approximated by the ratio of
municipal waste/compost (measured in units) and total population within a country

expressing the conversion progress of waste into resources, namely the recycling rate of
municipal waste (EUROSTAT, 2017c). As the circular economy is mainly based on
research and innovation, we use 2 indicators in this field, namely the gross domestic
expenditure on research and development (R&D) as a percentage in the GDP and the
number of patents related to recycling and secondary raw, expressed per 1 million
inhabitants (EUROSTAT, 2017a). These indicators have been used to assess the impact on
some standard macroeconomic variables, associated with sustainable development, such as
the real GDP growth rate.
In testing these models, we started from the fact that the variables that evaluate the circular
economy impact the resource productivity and the real GDP growth rate. As such, the
following research hypotheses were considered:
H1: The resource productivity is positively influenced by the circular economy measures;
H2: The research and innovation positively influence the resource productivity;
H3: The environmental taxes have a positive influence on the resource productivity;
H4: The recycling activity has a positive impact on real GDP growth rate;
H5: The innovation related to recycling and secondary raw has a negative relation with the
real GDP growth rate.
As such, we used time series data panel regressions, starting from the general regression
equation and the model proposed by Schmidheiny (2016), given by:
𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝑋𝑖𝑡′ 𝛽 + 𝜇𝑖 + 𝜗𝑖𝑡 i=1, .... ,N; t = 1,...,T

(1)

where:
I = cross-section dimension (transversal section);
t = time (time series dimension);
α, β = the equation’s coefficients;
𝑋𝑖𝑡′ = the it observation of the explaining variables;
𝑢𝑖𝑡 = individual effect;
𝜗𝑖𝑡 = residual.
Using time series data panel regressions, we estimate the fixed effect model and the random
effect model, the choice for one of them being done using the Hausman test. As the circular
economy concept is central for the European Commission and the European Parliament
(European Commission, 2017a), we used a sample consisting of the 28 member states of
the European Union, in order to assess the measures related to the circular economy in each
member state.
We used data for the 2005-2016 timeframe, the longest for which statistical data have been
identified in the EUROSTAT database (EUROSTAT, 2017a). This time interval also includes
the global financial crisis that had significant effects on some variables that are considered in
the analysis on the circular economy (especially, the real GDP growth rate that decreased in
almost every member state of the European Union). As the insufficient number of
panel regressions, in order to capture the possible relationships between the circular economy
indicators and macroeconomic variables, such as the real GDP growth rate.
The annual data for the 2005-2016 time period for resource productivity (RES_PROD
variable), recycling rate of packaging waste (RECYCL_RATE variable), recycling rate of
biowaste (RECYCL_BIOWASTE variable), recycling rate of municipal waste
(RECYCL_MUNWASTE variable), environmental tax revenues as a percentage in GDP
(ENV_TAX_GDP variable), as well as the research activity (given by the number of
patents related to recycling and secondary raw per 1 million inhabitants, the PATENTS
variable, and the gross domestic expenditure on R&D as a percentage in GDP, the
RD_GDP variable), the real GDP growth rate (REALGDP_GROWTH variable) were
considered. We used the data available on the official websites of the Eurostat
(http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat) and World Bank (www.worldbank.org).

3. Results and discussions
Before proceeding to this analysis, in Figure no. 2 we present the evolution of the number
of patents related to recycling and secondary raw, in the European Union, for the 20022013 time frame (EUROSTAT, 2017a). The aim is to emphasize, once more, the
governmental and private sector interest in research and innovation process that tries to
lengthen the life cycle of the raw materials and, as a consequence, to implement the circular
economy concept.
We can see from Figure no. 2 that in the European Union the importance of the research
and innovation in the transition process from the linear economy towards the circular
economy has strengthened (as the sustainable development principles are applied),
respectively by an increase of more than 40% of the number of patents related to the
recycling of raw and secondary raw material in 2013, compared with 2002.

305.19

284.93

281.57

229.33

254.52

211.04

100

236.03

150

245.9

200

259.68

250

265.82

300

346.84

350

363.78

400

50
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Figure no. 2: The number of patents related to recycling and secondary raw
in the EU, per 1 million inhabitants (2002-2013)
Source: own computation, EUROSTAT

transition from the linear economy to the circular economy), as expressed by the
RES_PROD variable, given by some variables associated to the circular economy, we used
time series data panel regressions. We propose a model where the dependent variable is
RES_PROD, and the independent variables are RECYCL_RATE, RECYCL_
MUNWASTE, ENV_TAX_GDP, PATENTS and RD_GDP, the results being presented in
Table no.1. By using the Hausman test, we find that the relationship between the dependent
variable and the exogenous variable is given by the random effect model.
Considering this model, that explains 22.72% of the dependent variable RES_PROD
evolution using the other 5 independent variables, we observe the existence of a positive
relationship between the resource productivity and the considered measures associated to
the circular economy, such as the recycling rate of packaging waste, recycling rate of
municipal waste, environmental taxes imposed by the European Union member states and
the research and innovation (such as the number of patents related to the recycling and
secondary raw or the gross domestic expenditure on R&D as percentage in GDP). This
result confirms the empirical findings related to the positive impact the environmental
protection and recycling measures have on resource productivity in the economy (and,
therefore, the Hypothesis H1 is validated).
Table no. 1: The proposed model for RES_PROD variable,
using 5 independent variables, for the 2005-2016 time frame
Correlated Random Effects ‒ Hausman Test
Test Summary

Chi-Sq. Statistic

Chi-Sq. d.f.

Prob.

Cross-section random

9.988421

5

Independent variable

Coefficient

Prob.

0.0756
R-squared

RECYCL_RATE

0.006467

0.0023

RECYCL_MUNWAST

0.010307

0.0000

ENV_TAX_GDP

0.035855

0.4964

PATENTS

0.068711

0.0035

RD_GDP

0.159987

0.0246

Dependent variable

RES_PROD

0.227299

Source: own computation, Eviews estimation
The positive relationship between the resource productivity and the recycling (as given by
the recycling rate of packaging waste and recycling rate of municipal waste) can be
explained by the positive effect on the total costs in the economy, as a result of
implementing the adequate measures for environmental protection. These solutions are
envisaged by the European Union’s member states that already have elaborated strategies
for systemic changes within the economy (the Finland case that adopted a strategy towards
the circular economy by 2025). Moreover, increasing the recycling and reusing of the
municipal waste, compared to the actual method, of incineration, is aimed to reduce the
emissions of greenhouse gases, to decrease the prices of secondary raw materials or to
create the compost and energy. Using this model, increasing by one unit the recycling rate
of the municipal waste will lead to an increase in resource productivity by 0.01307, a
statistically significant relation, but not determinant for improving the productivity. A lower
impact (although statistically significant) is given by the recycling rate of packaging waste,
a process directly connected with the production activity at the level of the economy.
research and innovation activities from the European Union and the resource productivity,
measured by the RES_PROD variable (therefore, the Hypothesis H2 is validated). This
relation confirms the data and empirical observations, being explained by the EU’s
companies and institutions prone to identification and implementation of the technological
solutions needed for production cost reduction. As such, the increase by one unit of the
number of patents related to recycling and secondary raw materials in the EU (expressed
per 1 million inhabitants) will lead to an increase in the resource productivity by 0.068711,
and an 1% increase in the expenditure on R&D as a percentage in GDP will lead to an
increase in resource productivity by 0.159988. Similarly, the positive relation between the
environmental taxes as a percentage in GDP and the resource productivity is confirmed by
the proposed model, even though the coefficient of the variable ENV_TAX_GDP is not
statistically significant (therefore, the Hypothesis H3 is validated). This result confirms the
conclusions obtained by Sørensen (2017), who stated that a legislative package related to
environment and subsidies, is an important precondition for an efficient recycling activity.
Using this equation’s results, the positive relationship between the resource productivity
and the direct and indirect measures related to the circular economy, such as the recycling
rate of municipal waste, the recycling rate of packaging waste, the R&D related to
recycling and secondary raw materials (measured as the number of patents and the gross
expenditure on R&D as percentage in GDP), the environmental taxes as a percentage in
GDP, was confirmed. By eliminating the only independent variable that is not statistically
significant (the one that shows the environmental taxes as a percentage in GDP), we find a
new model, presented in Table no. 2. This model shows that the positive relationships from
the previous model are also proved, between the resource productivity and the research and
innovation related to recycling. As such, the first three research hypotheses are confirmed.
These results stress out the positive impact the new technologies, based on the sustainable
development and the efficient use of resources, even those from recycling, have on resource
productivity. Moreover, these results provide one more reason for implementing the measures
envisaged by the European Commission and the United Nations Organization for worldwide
sustainable development, expressed by the documents aiming to fulfill this goal by 2030.
Table no. 2: The proposed model for RES_PROD variable,
considering 4 independent variables, in the 2005-2016 time frame
Correlated Random Effects ‒ Hausman Test
Test Summary

Chi-Sq. Statistic

Chi-Sq. d.f.

Prob.

Cross-section random

9.075406

4

Independent variable

Coefficient

Prob.

0.0592
R-squared

RECYCL_RATE

0.006394

0.0025

RECYCL_MUNWAST

0.010452

0.0000

PATENTS

0.067930

0.0038

RD_GDP

0.162467

0.0222

Dependent variable

RES_PROD

0.226208

Source: own computation, Eviews estimation
In order to test the other 2 hypotheses (H4 and H5), we use a model that has a dependent
variable ‒ the real GDP growth rate, while the independent variables are those associated
with the circular economy concept. As such, Table no. 3 presents the results of a time series
(REALGDP_GROWTH variable), and the independent variables are RES_PROD,
RECYCL_RATE, RECYCL_BIOWASTE, ENV_TAX_GDP, PATENTS and RD_GDP.
Using the Hausman test, the fixed effect model is the one that we consider, as its
probability is below 5%.
Analyzing the data from Table no. 3, we observe a positive relationship between the real
GDP growth rate and the resource productivity (although the independent variable’s
coefficient is not statistically significant), a result that confirms the empirical observations.
Using the results from Table no. 3, we observe that the fourth hypothesis H4 is not
confirmed, considering the coefficient of the variable recycling rate of packaging waste
(that is negative and statistically significant). This situation is determined by the early stage
of implementation of the measures aimed to realize transition towards the circular
economy, a fact that maintains the disparities between the present and circular economy (in
order for the production to be more efficient, as measured by the real GDP growth rate, are
still used ‒ on a large scale – raw materials whose exploitation impacts the environment).
Table no. 3: The proposed model for REALGDP_GROWTH variable, considering 4
independent variables, in the 2005-2016 time frame
Correlated Random Effects ‒ Hausman Test
Test Summary
Cross-section random
Dependent variable

Independent variable

REALGDP_GRO
WTH

Chi-Sq. Statistic

Chi-Sq. d.f.

Prob.

6

0.0437
R-squared

12.961132
Coefficient

Prob.

RES_PROD

0.751604

0.3713

RECYCL_RATE

-0.117857

0.0000

ENV_TAX_GDP

-0.362800

0.6564

PATENTS

-0.812382

0.0240

0.180987

Source: own computation, Eviews estimation
The results from Table no. 3 also show the confirmation of the fifth hypothesis H5, related
to the negative relationship between the real GDP growth rate and the number of patents
related to recycling and secondary raw materials. This relation can be explained by the
research and innovation’s characteristics, especially by the long time interval between the
idea and production (starting the research, making a prototype or finding a new technology,
patent registration, practical validation of the patent and, moreover, its use in production, in
order to reduce the economic activity’s impact on the environment). The results confirm
also the negative impact the environmental taxes (measured as percentage in GDP) have on
the economic growth (as measured by the real GDP growth rate).
Considering a relevance threshold of 5%, we can conclude that the measures associated
with the circular economy (as expressed by the indicators used in the proposed regressions)
have a direct impact on the resource productivity and on economic growth, measured by the
real GDP growth rate. These results are confirmed by previous studies (Sørensen, 2017,
who revealed the effects the environemntal taxes have on the transition towards the circular
economy, Bastein et al., 2013, that emphasized the positive impact the recycling has on the
resource productivity). On the other hand, the observed negative relation between the real
economic growth and the research and innovation related to recycling provides a new
insight, using data from the European Union, on the effects the transition towards the
two indicators, as others outlined, such as Ghisellini, Cialani and Ulgiati, 2016).

Conclusions
Using data for the 2005-2016 timeframe, for the 28 member states of the European Union,
we confirmed the existence of a positive relationship between circular economy measures
and resource productivity, with a positive impact on economic growth. The obtained result
shows the effect induced on the resource productivity by the measures aimed to achieve
sustainable development, by the transition from the linear economy towards the circular
economy. From the obtained results, an increase by one unit of the number of patents
registered in the EU related to recycling and secondary raw materials will lead to an
increase in resource productivity by 0.068711, whereas an increase by one unit of the
recycling rate of municipal waste will enhance the resource productivity by 0.01307.
One reason for this evolution is given by the systemic change induced by the transition
towards the circular economy, with short term costs, that is revealed by the validation of the
H5 hypothesis, namely the negative relationship between the real GDP growth rate and the
number of patents. The benefits induced by the measures associated with the circular
economy are not seen at the environment protection level, but also at improving the
resource efficiency. As such, Germany, Japan and China defined quantitative objectives
related to the resource productivity enhancements, by in China’s case ‒ as much as 15%
during 2010-2015 (Rouquet and Nicklaus, 2014).
The obtained results confirm the hypothesis, mainly related to the positive effect the
measures associated with the circular economy have on resource productivity and economic
growth, confirming the European point of view that an increase of the resource productivity
with 30% by 2030 may lead to a GDP growth of almost 1% (European Commission, 2014).
This study may be of importance for local, regional and national public authorities involved
in framing the legislative ground, as well as for companies that can elaborate the business
plans according to the expected effects the circular economy implementation may have on
every member state. This model provides useful information for companies, as it shows that
the economic growth can be achieved not only by using raw materials, but also by
reinserting waste into the production cycle, reducing the associated costs. This fact may
lead to an increased demand for ecological products, to develop new products and to
strengthen the efforts in the research and innovation field.
Considering the limited data on this topic, as well as the effects of the transition towards the
circular economy that may lead to major structural changes in the EU member states’
economies, we may find new directions of research. As such, starting from studying the
impact of other circular economy indicators (such as the dynamics of trade with recycling
and secondary raw materials) may have on some macroeconomic variables, we can extend
the research also on the impact on the quality of life for the European citizens. Moreover, a
large field of research may be the impact of the social economy on reducing the social
inequalities and fostering social inclusion in the analyzed countries. Starting from the
study’s limitations, related to a relatively short time frame available to accurately reflect the
path towards circular economy, the early stage in some countries or the lack of necessary
data for evaluating the circular economy, a further research area can be in lengthening the

measures adopted in Europe.


