environment, speed of action is also essential (Yang and Meyer, 2015). Nowadays, in the
capitalist economic model, economic growth is considered as a basis for welfare of
societies. Using the concept of gross domestic product, economic growth is currently
treated as an aggregated growth of production of goods and services in various sectors of
the economy. For example, the main source of economic growth in agriculture is efficiency
improvement (Bezat-Jarzębowska and Rembisz, 2013).
However, new definitions and new approaches to assess competitiveness of the EU
countries have been recently discussed in the economic literature. The traditional approach
of counties’ competitiveness evaluation oriented on cost-based measures such as unit labor
costs, real effective exchange rate (REER) or unit labor productivity is not sufficient.
Today’s Europe seeks for sustainable, smart, inclusive and environmentally friendly
economic growth. From this perspective, the traditional cost-based approach of productivity
assessment provides a limited perspective. For instance, potentiality of knowledge-based
economy and firm-level perspective are not captured by the traditional approach
(Rozmahela et al., 2014). Regardless of whether cognitive competence causes national
wealth or whether there is a reciprocal relationship, aid directed at improving the cognitive
competence of a population should have an economic payoff (Hunt and Wittmann, 2008).
Following the same stream, it makes sense to highlight that, from the perspective of
sustainable development, it is a strong correlation between reduction of corruption,
economic prosperity and reduction of environmental degradation. While corruption will not
be recognized as a global problem for the conservation of biodiversity, effective actions
will not happen. Emerging studies have found that the level of corruption in a country is
positively associated with environmental degradation (Krishnan et al., 2014).
It is also important to notice that social conflict and slow growth are specific characteristics
of many developing economies. For these economies, the importance of deeprooted
institutions of property rights and conflict management that provide a foundation for
individuals in the enforcement of their property claims is increasingly recognized. In this
context, some researchers have found that maximization of economic efficiency may call
for a reduction in growth in order to mitigate the problem of diversion, even though the
economy's growth is inefficiently slow in the absence of taxation (Gonzalez and Neary,
2008).
The development of an increasingly globalized economy adds new urgency to humanity’s
efforts in order to anticipate the challenges ahead and the opportunities for further
prosperity. Calamities that once were regional in nature, such as endemic diseases,
economic boom and bust cycles, or local social and political conflicts, now can rapidly
spread to unravel the fabric of previously far-flung places. However, globalization can also
help mobilizing distant resources to address local challenges. The uncertainty about
possible outcomes of ever larger numbers of interactions among ever larger numbers of
people, businesses and institutions, keeps increasing, and the prospects for true surprises
keep rising (Ruth et al., 2011).
Recent contributions to ecological economics and related social sciences indicate that
issues such as climate change, resource depletion and environmental degradation cannot be
effectively addressed under conditions of continued economic growth. Indeed, in the
absence of evidence for absolute decoupling of gross domestic product (GDP) growth,

not question the priority placed on GDP growth (Fritz and Koch, 2014).
Since economic growth is intrinsically linked with an increased production of goods and
services, and on its turn this is linked with resource depletion and environmental impacts
such as global warming, the assumption of continued economic expansion in rich countries
challenges the possibility to achieve prosperity without growth (Jackson, 2009). As
example, for developing sustainable products, design engineers need to foresee diverse
interrelations between a product’s characteristics and it’s economic, social and
environmental impacts (Buchert et al., 2015).
In this context, the present paper treats the complicated aspect of balancing two
contradictory dimensions related to prosperity of civilization: economic growth and
sustainable development. In this respect, the paper includes a background section where the
meaning of economic competitiveness is analyzed in relation with prosperity from a niche
angle. It is shown that economic growth does not necessarily lead to social prosperity in
any conditions. Further, in the next two sections of the paper the perverse effect of
economic growth in relation to social prosperity is analyzed. Major conflicts are identified,
too. They are afterwards tackled from an innovative problem solving perspective, revealing
several lines of action towards ensuring economic growth with lower or low impact on
sustainable development. Examples of public policies in relation to this issue are also
highlighted. Paper ends with conclusions and insights on future researches.
1. Basics on economic competitiveness
Economic competitiveness is a major indicator for nations, regions and companies in terms
of capability to operate in the global market with success. There is no unanimous definition
of economic competitiveness (Huggins, 2003). For example, the Irish National Council of
Competitiveness considers economic competitiveness as the ability of a nation to be
successful on the international markets in order to improve the quality of life of the whole
nation (National Competitiveness Council, 2014). The World Economic Forum sees
economic competitiveness as the ability of a nation to get high and sustained rates of the
GDP/capita (World Economic Forum, 2014). At Harvard Business School, the recent
definition of economic competitiveness considers social aspects incorporated. Thus, a
nation or a region is competitive in the limit in which companies that operate within that
space are capable to compete with success in the regional and global economy improving in
the same time wages and living standards of the ordinary people (Harvard Business School,
2013). There are several other similar definitions of economic competitiveness, but they are
not mentioned here because frankly speaking do not bring new perspectives on this
concept.
An important issue that is not captured by any definition of economic competitiveness is
the ethics of governments and multinational corporations (MNCs) in the international
politics. This aspect is graphically captured in Figure no. 1. According to this, several
aspects generate barriers for economic development of a nation. They include protectionism
of national markets, health of national economic environment, national and international
legislation, commercial wars, as well as the ethics of strong governments and MNCs on the
international politics. These barriers require extra-innovations to be considered by the

attractive levels of productivity and wages for workers.

Figure no. 1. Barriers in the equation of economic competitiveness
Having ethics in mind, this paper proposes a more nuanced definition of economic
competitiveness. It defines economic competitiveness of a nation as a measure of
happiness, welfare, health, morality, ethics and social statute of the ordinary people and the
capacity of preservation, renewal, diversification and sustainable development of human,
natural, financial and technological resources of that nation through the prism of social
entrepreneurship initiatives and medium and long term commercial viability of autochthon
companies in the national and international competition constrained and distorted by “zero
sum result” egoistic interests, corruption, imperialism, economic stability treaties and
political manipulation.
This perspective on economic competitiveness highlights the fact that a high growing
GDP/capita does not necessarily mean an automatic increase of the population welfare. A
durable economic growth, which allows high rates of workforce productivity and
employment, requires capabilities from the public and private socio-economic entities to
produce and/or sell products and services with high value added, as well as to attract
sufficient external resources (human, financial, etc.) to sustain development.
Is thus possible to define a framework in the global competition such as all countries to
win? In theory, this requires smart ways to increase GDP/capita, considering both moral,
social and ecological perspectives, as well as optimal approaches from economic point of
view (i.e. to maximize effects in the given constrain space of action). Thus, to ensure social
prosperity, extra-innovations are necessary in the equation of economic competitiveness.

perverse effect of economic growth in relation with social prosperity; that is, economic
growth strictly seen from the restrictive view of GDP/capita might neglect – and facts
shows that it actually neglects – sustainability both from social, ecological and economical
perspectives. This is mainly because, the conventional models of economic growth mostly
operate with traditional resources that are energy intensive and quantitatively limited.
2. A brief literature review on sustainable economic growth
Analysis of economic growth from the perspective of its implications to environmental
degradation is in the attention of researchers from more than two decades. There are
research works whose theory is that the environmental limited endowments do not
constitute a concern for economic expansion (Radetzki, 1992). Radetzki bases his theory on
human behavior in response to tendencies towards environmental degradation, claiming
that people will adapt and “will assure the compatibility of continued economic growth
with the maintenance of satisfactory environmental standards”. Beckerman is another
researcher that considers environmental resource constraints do not represent a limitation
for economic growth (Beckerman, 1992). He also claims that sustainable growth is a
concept that is morally vulnerable or nonoperational. Other early work on this topic says no
evidence was found that environmental quality deteriorates continuously with economic
growth (Grossman and Krueger, 1994). Their researches concluded that economic growth
comes up with an initial degradation of environment, but there is a turning point (around
the income of 8000$ per capita) where economic growth brings improvement in the quality
of environment. To a similar conclusion comes up another work (Panayotou, 2000), which
introduces the concept of inverted-U relationship between environmental degradation and
economic growth, also known as the “Environmental Kuznets Curve”.
Despite the above mentioned conclusions, if no coordination exists between industrial
growth, environment and resource, high unbalances occur (Zhengge, 2008). This statement
is the result of researches done in five regions of China. It brings a major message; that is,
economic growth should be seriously balanced with an adequate structure and
technological progress of the industrial sectors in an ecosystem such as to lower the
environmental footprint. A valuable documentation resource is the work of Brock and
Taylor, which reviews various theories and empirics related to the binome “economic
growth-environment sustainability” (Brock and Taylor, 2005). They conclude that still
several theoretical questions exist, especially in relation with the limit of growth such as to
avoid the “tipping point” from where the environment cannot compensate consumption of
raw resources. Another advocate for a well-controlled economic growth to limit
environmental pollution stands in the work done by Anastasios Xepapadeas. He highlights
significant deviations between market outputs and social optimum, as well as between
environmental quality and economic development in non-controlled socio-economic
ecosystems (Xepapadeas, 2005). He considers crucial to find ways of decomposing total
factor productivity into its sources and controlling economic growth from an environmental
perspective, as long as evidences clearly show an economy produces not only the desired
output, but also undesirable environmental pollution.
An important consideration on economic growth is about its moral consequence in society.
Seeing economic growth in direct relation with the living standards of citizens, empirical
studies observed that people move towards democratization, tolerance, diversity and
(Friedman, 2005). Thus, the challenge is not about building prosperity without economic
growth, but about finding solutions to grow without affecting sustainable development. The
key issue stands in the direct correlation between economic growth and energy needs for
mobility, production, living, education, etc. With conventional energy sources, dataset
show environment is degrading and CO2 are increasing (Rania and Chaker, 2015; Xiong et
al., 2015). Therefore, most scientific papers that treat the conflict between economic growth
and environmental degradation are focused on technological issues (e.g. new energy
sources, inclusive development, waste management through technology, etc.), area
planning and fight against the corruption reflected in savage exploitation of raw materials.

3. Research methodology
In this research, the methodology to approach the conflict between economic growth and
sustainable development is formulated around the scheme from Figure no. 2. On one side,
classical paths for economic growth generate more complications in society, including
negative effects on sustainable development. On the other side, the issue is about the
possibility to ensure social prosperity without economic growth.

Figure no. 2. Dilemma between ecologically sustainable economic growth
and social prosperity

management called TRIZ-M (Brad and Brad, 2013), which is actually the adaptation to
managerial issues of a well-known method called TRIZ (theory of inventive problem
solving) (Altshuller, 2004). The TRIZ-M method works like this: (1) identifies a conflict
between two parameters (e.g. more energy supply needed is in conflict with lower raw
minerals consumption); (2) associates to each particular parameter a generic one from a
limited list of 39 generic parameters (e.g. energy consumption is associated with parameter
“quantity of substance” and raw material consumption is associated with “waste of
material“ or/and “secondary harmful factors acting on the system”); (3) uses a so-called
TRIZ-M matrix of contradictions to identify generic directions of intervention (also called
vectors of innovation); (4) ideates around the generic directions of intervention to formulate
innovative solutions to the particular problem.
In order to find out more about the TRIZ-M method please consult the web link:
http://193.226.17.76:8080/sts291-mvc/tool_cmx.do?aProject=1&aSet=1&aAct=1&aTarget
=1&aActivityName=1 that introduces a software tool developed by the authors for easy
application of TRIZ-M. In the framework of TRIZ-M, economic growth is associated with
the parameter “amount of substance (e.g. money, know-how, output, etc.)”, and sustainable
development is associated with the parameter “secondary (side) harmful effects on the
system”.
The following generic vectors of innovation are proposed by TRIZ-M in the case of conflict
“economic growth-environmental sustainability”: (a) Vector 1: actions to increase local
quality; (b) Vector 2: actions to transform system properties; (c) Vector 3: actions to create
composite structures; (d) Vector 4: actions to introduce inert environment. This is
suggestively illustrated in Figure no. 3.

New
properties

Economic
growth
Inert
environment

Figure no. 3. Vectors of innovation towards environmental sustainable
economic growth
Each generic vector of innovation has several guidelines. Vector 1 (actions to increase local
quality) is detailed into the following patterns:
 Actions to transform a homogeneous structure into a heterogeneous structure or vice
versa;
 Actions to ensure that different parts of the system will perform different functions;

position for its operation.
Vector 2 (actions to transform system properties) consists of the following directions of
investigation:






Actions to change the state of the system;
Actions to change the concentration of the state;
Actions to change the conditions;
Actions to change the degree of flexibility;
Actions to change the volume.

Vector 3 (composite structures) means to replace a homogeneous system with a composite
one. Vector 4 (inert environment) is about replacing the normal environment with an inert
one or about introducing a neutral element in the system. The vectors of innovation and
their guidelines are sources of inspiration for the policy makers to formulate solutions to the
problem under consideration. This issue is treated in the next section of the paper.
4. Results and discussions
The guidelines revealed in the previous section are important pillars towards formulating
innovative solutions to balance economic growth with environmental sustainability. The
four vectors and their related directions of intervention actually show to what constrains
should be subjected economic activities in a given regional/national ecosystem such as
environmental-friendly innovations to be promoted for growth and social prosperity. Thus,
instead of trial-and-error approaches to discover the proper patterns of evolution for the
complex ecosystem, policy makers would know in advance where to direct their efforts.
Beyond this, having known the set of directions of intervention, it is possible to determine
the motricity and dependency of each direction, as well as the correlations between these
areas of manifestation. With such information, policy makers can define priorities of their
policies.
The third important aspect is the balancing mechanism between the economic growth and
environmental sustainability. Researches presented in the introductory sections of this
paper highlight that environmental degradation can be avoided in the equation of economic
growth if a clear control acts on the industry structure and proportion, as well as on the
technology used. These researches reveal that at a certain level of economic prosperity
industry structure and economic activities are such as they support environmental
protection (please revisit the Environmental Kuznets Curve); the challenge is in the
developing and emerging economies, with low productivity rates and economic activities
that stands on basic factors (natural resources, human resources for physical work). The
smart use of the vectors of innovation proposed in the “Research methodology” section can
bring valuable ideas for adequate policy design in order to balance the evolution of
economy in good harmony with environmental preservation, too.
Figure no. 4 illustrates the matrix for determining the motricity and dependency of the 11
generic directions of intervention. In Figure no. 4, motricity decreases from 1 to 7, and
dependency also decreases from 1 to 7. The best areas of intervention are those with high
motricity and low dependency (the best case is motricity 1 and dependency 7).

(the worst case is motricity 7 and dependency 1).

B
31
5

C
66
3

B

C

B

A
B
C

B
12
7

22
6

C
C
C
C
C
120
2

A
C
67
3

A
B
B

A
B
A
12
7

C
C
C
B
C

C
58
4

B
B
C

DEPENDENCY

C

B
B
C
C
B
D

V4.2

B
A
B
B

A

C
A

SUM

C
C
D
B

V4.1

C
D
D
B
C

V2.5

V2.3

V2.4

C

B

V3.1

V2.1

B

C
D
D
C
C
C
D
C
D
B
D
174
1

V2.2

Transform a homogeneous structure into a heterogeneous structure or vice versa
Make such as different parts of the system to perform different functions
Each part of the system to be placed in the most favourable position for its operation
Change the state of the system
Change the concentration of the state
Change the conditions
Change the degree of flexibility
Change the volume
Replace a homogeneous system with a composite one
Replace the normal environment with an inert one
Introduce a neutral element in the system
SUM
MOTRICITY

V1.3

V1.1

V1.1
V1.2
V1.3
V2.1
V2.2
V2.3
V2.4
V2.5
V3.1
V4.1
V4.2

V1.2

1 = high motricity … 7 = low motricity; 1=high dependency … 7=low dependency;
A=weak influence=1; B=medium influence=3; C=strong influence=9; D=very
strong/critical influence=27

49
67
84
34
37
63
52
34
87
15
70

4
5
1
6
6
3
4
6
1
7
2

B
C

A
A

17
7

13
7

Figure no. 4. Motricity, dependency and correlations
between innovative generic directions of intervention
Figure no. 5 shows in a suggestive way the relevance of the innovative generic areas of
intervention. In order to organize them in a decreasing order, a simple rule is to calculate
the square root of the sum of quadrates of motricity and dependency for each area of
intervention. For example, V1.3 has the index (12 + 32)1/2 = 3.16. Thus, the resulted order of
priority is: V1.3; V2.3; V1.1; V3.1; V2.4; V1.2; V4.2; V2.2; V2.1; V2.5; V4.1.
M
7

V2.1/
V4.1
V2.5

V4.2

6

V2.2

5

V1.2

4 V3.1
3 V1.3

V2.4

2

V2.3

1

V1.1
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

D

Figure no. 5. Positioning the generic areas of intervention by motricity
and dependency
Using the generic directions of intervention in their decreasing order, several innovation
policies are further proposed in this paper to reduce the contradictions between economic
growth and sustainable development. The first group of policies is referring to V1.3:
“actions to make each part of the system to work in the most favourable conditions”. The
public policies inspired from vector V1.3 are presented in the followings.

prosperity and sustainability. “Allocation” is about slicing the budget in optimal proportions to
various areas of interest such as to maximize prosperity and minimize environmental impact.
“Distribution” is about individualized giving of the limited slice of budget based on
effectiveness and efficiency criteria. There are different indexes used to measure social
prosperity. This paper encourages the following prosperity metrics: familial bonds; charity
intent; trust between people; personal freedom; personal safety; personal security; women
rights; health care quality; quality of education; equality of education; entrepreneurship
support; democracy level; corruption level. For sustainability, the following metrics are
considered: air quality; river and lake water quality; emissions per capita; emissions per energy
generated; industrial carbon intensity; growing stock of forest; irrigation stress; agriculture
subsidies; burnt land area; river and lake trophic level; pesticide level; sulphur dioxide
emissions; regional ozone; area of protected land. Prosperity metrics can be ranked by means
of extensive sociological surveys. Sustainability metrics can be ranked by experts. Considering
various planning tools like relationship matrices, various sectors and sub-sectors can be very
elegant weighted for budget allocation (e.g. education, health, defence, culture, administration,
environment, etc.). For distribution, performance targets are allocated to each budgeted sector.
A project initiative to a certain sector means allocation of an amount of money for some
activities in order to cover a percentage of the targets. Distribution is actually done with
priority to those project initiatives that demonstrate capability to cover a higher set of metrics
and levels of their targets at lower costs. It is encouraged to apply this policy both at central,
regional and local levels.
Public policy 2: Support smart specialization (RDI, incentives, guaranties, education,
entrepreneurship, etc.) in areas of economy that best support prosperity and sustainability.
The process is very similar with the one described at policy 1, but in this case criteria of
prosperity and sustainability are deployed against economic sectors and education fields of
specialization. Even lagging countries and regions can apply this policy, using moderate
quantities of basic factors to generate high value added outputs and supporting connectivity
with leading countries for business model development. For example, instead of cutting
down large areas of forest and sell wood logs, the policy enforces to limit deforestation and
to use the cut wood in local factories to manufacture luxury furniture, by investing in
training rural communities in luxury woodwork and partnership development with design
studios (autochthon or international), as well as with global networks for distribution and
sale. There are already examples of smart businesses and economic activities that started
from basic factors and endowments and then were capable to generate high value added and
lower environmental degradation.
Vector V2.3 is the second source of inspiration for sustainable growth public policies. It
refers to “actions for changing conditions”. This line is interpreted in this paper by the
following innovation policies.
Public policy 3: Over-taxation of energy for industrial use in polluting sectors, overtaxation of natural raw materials and transportation of low value-added goods and raw
materials. This policy will encourage circular economy, social economy, and investments
in education of local communities and in higher value added businesses.
Public policy 4: Commitment to effectively fight against corruption. Fight against
corruption is a political will. “Change of conditions” in this case is also applied to the way
of approaching the policy. Top-down approaches were already proven to be less effective.
many interesting things have happened in the recent years by persistent actions of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), functional economic cluster initiatives, interest groups
linked by means of social platforms (Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.), media, etc., powerful
initiatives and constant pressure on politicians can be executed to change legislation and to
act with more conviction against corruption. In fact, the democratic process of elections can
be radically changed by elites and public influencers using social networks, too. Legislative
initiatives must come from communities, while politicians must be analyzed by means of
their effectiveness in supporting these initiatives. In principle, effective measures are those
that penalize infringements in a way that the associated risk is above the level of
psychological acceptance.
Public policy 5: Link investment to its lifecycle and to risk reduction. Change the rules in
public and private investments such as other indicators than price to become factors of
decision. For example, instead of price, financial net present value (FNPV), internal rate on
return (IRR), return on investment (ROI), and economic net present value (ENPV) should
become relevant decision means. Also, instead of considering products, large investments
should consider product-service systems. A very good model in this respect is that already
applied in the defense sector, as well as the model of total cost of ownership (TCO).
The next vector in the list of priorities is V1.1: “actions to change the system from uniform
to non-uniform”, with respect to which the following innovation policies are encouraged in
this paper.
Public policy 6: Put more accent on projects that promote moral evolution. Good examples
in this respect are the open-source projects in information and communication technologies
(ICT), especially for the public sector, but also the support of open-technology projects in
other economic areas. Beyond this, cultural evolution of people is essential to promote
morality and cardinal virtues. In this respect, public and private projects that promote
exemplary models and personalities, success stories in various fields, social values, and
high-class cultural events must be fully financed or co-financed from public funds.
Crowdfunding and crowdsourcing initiatives promoted by public authorities and media are
also excellent innovations in this direction. Investment in education, not only in instruction
is a key issue in this direction, too. For example, entrepreneurial attitude and qualities
cannot be learned in a traditional course. This requires years of non-conventional training
of critical mass of people from each generation. It is like the evolution of a person that
practices martial arts along many years, which fights against his/her limitations and
progresses by getting out continuously of the own comfort.
Public policy 7: Encourage reverse and inclusive technological innovation. Affordable
technologies for low-end consumers and disadvantaged communities are very good examples
of sustainable economic growth. Over 85% of the global market is referring to these categories
of consumers. There are already plenty of successful projects in construction that show it is
possible to build relative comfortable houses with budgets varying from 1000$ to 5000$ or
10000$. Only directed distortions in the market make that many people to have no house or to
work the whole life to payback the bank loan for a house. Like food and clothes, a decent
house must be a basic good for every individual. Many technological innovations consume too
much resources and in reality very few people are capable to really exploit the complete
potential of these innovations. There are many examples of technologies in health care that cost
3000$ and make the same things like others of 100000$. It is only the greed of capitalists to
going to be changed in the future.
Public policy 8: Lead moderate consumption by higher taxation. Countries like Sweden,
Finland and Norway are good role models for sustainable economic growth with respect to
this public policy.
Public policy 9: Direct personal and corporate consumption towards sustainable growth.
Introduce extra-taxation to all goods and services that affect environment during operation or
due to the technologies used to manufacture them. An energetic index and an environmental
index must be designed and applied in this respect. Introduce extra-taxation to all personal
earnings that exceed a certain reasonable limit and direct these taxes to social, cultural,
educational, health, research and environmental projects according to the will of the charged
person. Limits should differ from country-to-country (e.g. a limit for USA in 2015 would be
100000$ net/year/person or 400000$ net/year/4-person family; a limit for Romania in 2015
would be 24000€ net/year/person or 96000€ net/year/4-person family).
Public policy 10: Support economic initiatives that promote “common shared value”
(CSV). Shared value is a business practice that enhances the competitiveness of a company
while simultaneously advancing the economic and social conditions in the communities in
which the company operates. The concept is attributed to M.E. Porter and M.R. Kramer
(Porter and Kramer, 2011). Shared value is not corporate social responsibility and is not
philanthropy. It is a novel way to achieve economic success by recognizing that markets are
defined by both economic and societal needs; or, in very simple words, to create value for
all stakeholders not only for shareholders. Bio-food production is a shared value economic
activity. Mobile apps for smart parking in crowded urban areas is a shared value business.
Supporting farmers to develop permaculture and to buy from them the agro-products at
decent prices is shared value; and examples can continue. Incentives given by government
through various grants for such businesses would be beneficial for sustainable economic
growth. An interesting source of documentation is the portal sharedvalue.org.
It is not the purpose of this paper to introduce the comprehensive set of public policies that
might emerge from the vectors of innovation revealed in the previous section of the paper.
The paper mainly highlights the fact that it is possible to approach the policy making
process for economic growth in a smart, structured and systematic way with respect to
some constrains, such as the environmental issues in this particular case. However, brief
exemplifications of other policies are introduced in the next paragraphs.
In relation with the group “parameter change”, the following innovation policies could be
considered: more focus on knowledge-based economy, more accent on intangible assets,
incentives for resilient factories, development of circular economy, more focus on eeconomy, on “green economy” and mostly on “blue economy”.
The group referring to “preliminary actions” leads to possible innovation policies like:
impose investment models based on life-cycle costs, increase connectivity in
communication and know-how through open innovation practices, regional economic
autonomy.
The group “composite structures” leads to the following possible innovation policies:
incentives for business models based on polycentric innovation, support for strategic
aligned cluster initiatives, co-opetition models and collaborative consumption of expensive

of the innovation vectors introduced by this paper.
One could deduce from the examples of public policies highlighted in this paper that
ecologically sustainable economic growth involves orientation of economic models towards
their life-cycle, bottom-up approaches, colaborative consumption, polycentric innovations,
more orientation on social dimension, etc.
Conclusions
In the context of exponential growing of the population in some regions of the globe, of
visible climate change and saturation of many traditional markets, to which it can be added
the brutal and immoral exploitation of natural resources, exponential increase of energy
needs in a few concentrated parts of the world, globalization of the financial capital and
businesses, increased discrepancies between poor and reach people, the call for rapid
measures towards sustainable development is fully justified. However, the fear for a painful
transition that could lead not only to economic problems but mainly to social problems,
determines policy makers to approach sustainability in a very timorous way.
This paper shows that this dilemma can be tackled in a creative way with reasonable
positive results. Using a method for innovative conflict solving, this paper identifies
effective directions of intervention. The novelty of the approach consists in the fact that the
analysis of the conflict between resource conservation and the growing need of consuming
them is done with respect to the principle of ideal result (consumption in the limits of
capacity and regeneration cycle of resources) and proposes the search of solutions within
zones that are proper identified from the very beginning.
In order to overpass the contradiction between economic growth and sustainable
development, some nonconventional public policies are proposed. Because the set of public
policies emerge from a structured approach of the problem using the scientific foundation
behind the TRIZ-M method, it can be concluded that they might have a supplementary
degree of argumentation with respect to proposals that would emerge only on an empirical
basis. It is important to highlight the fact that, a series of themes already promoted in the
public space, as circular economy, colaborative consumption and co-opetition, investment
models based on life cycle thinking, smart specialization, etc. are also validated by a
structured analysis of the problem. In addition, this research brings to surface themes that
are not yet taken into account very seriously, as resilient production, polycentric
innovation, blue economy, shared value, optimal allocation and distribution, reverse
technological innovations, etc.
Results of this research show that prosperity can be achieved by implementing new policies
that are aligned with sustainability in its large sense (economic, social, and ecological).
Researches can be extended on identifying other conflicting areas in the equation of
economic growth and approaching them from an inventive perspective. Policies for
balancing sustainable development with economic growth can be further refined to the level
of actions and projects, both by means of public and private initiatives.
Acknowledgments
Support within the project PN-II-PT-PCCA-2013-4-1319 (Integrated Management System
of Innovation in SMEs) is acknowledged with gratitude.
Altshuller, G., 2004. The innovation algorithm: TRIZ, systematic innovation and technical
creativity. Psychology Press: New York.
Beckerman, W., 1992. Economic growth and the environment. Whose growth? Whose
environment? World Development, 20(4), pp.481-496.
Bezat-Jarzębowska, A. and Rembisz, W., 2013. Efficiency-focused economic modeling of
competitiveness in the agri-food sector. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 81,
pp.359-365.
Brad, S. and Brad, E., 2015. Enhancing SWOT analysis with TRIZ-based tools to integrate
systematic innovation in early task design. Procedia Engineering, 131, pp.616-625.
Brock, W. and Taylor, S., 2005. Economic growth and the environment: a review of theory
and empirics. Handbook of Economic Growth, 1(2), pp.1749-1821.
Buchert, T., Neugebauer, S., Schenker, S., Lindow, K. and Stark, R., 2015. Multi-criteria
decision making as a tool for sustainable product development: benefits and obstacles.
Procedia CIRP, 26, pp.70-75.
Cavaliere, M., Sedwards, S., Tarnita, C., Nowak, M. and Nagy, A.C., 2012. Prosperity is
associated with instability in dynamical networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology, iss.
299, pp.126-138.
European
Commission,
2010.
Europe
2020.
[online]
Available
at:
<http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:
2020:FIN:EN:PDF> [Accessed 3 April 2015].
Friedman, B., 2006. The moral consequences of economic growth. Society, Jan issue,
pp.15-22.
Fritz, M. and Koch, M., 2014. Potentials for prosperity without growth: ecological
sustainability, social inclusion and the quality of life in 38 countries. Ecological
Economics, 108(4), pp.191-199.
Gecek, S. and Legovic, T., 2012. Impact of maximum sustainable yield on competitive
community. Journal of Theoretical Biology, iss. 307, pp.96-103.
Gonzalez, F.M. and Neary, H.M., 2008. Prosperity without conflict. Journal of Public
Economics, 92(3), pp.2170-2181.
Grossman, G.M. and Kruger, A.B., 1994. Economic growth and the environment. NBER
Working Paper No. 4634. Cambridge MA.
Harvard Business School, 2013. US Competitiveness. [online] Available at:
<http://www.hbs.edu/competitiveness/Pages/default.aspx> [Accessed 3 April 2015].
Herciua, M. and Ogreana, C., 2014. An overview on European Union sustainable
competitiveness. Procedia Economics and Finance, 16, pp.651-656.
Huggins, R., 2003. Creating a UK competitiveness index: regional and local benchmarking.
Regional Studies, 37(1), pp.89-96.
Hunt, E. and Wittmann, W., 2008. National intelligence and national prosperity.
Intelligence, 36(1), pp.1-9.
Joshi, D., Hughes, B. and Sisk, T., 2015. Improving governance for the post-2015
sustainable development goals: scenario forecasting the next 50 years. World
Development, 70(2), pp.286-302.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(6), pp.596-597.
Krishnan, S., Teo, T. and Lim, V., 2014. Examining the relationships among e-government
maturity, corruption, economic prosperity and environmental degradation: a crosscountry analysis. Information & Management, 50(8), pp.638-649.
Molina-Azorín, J.F., Tarí J.J., Pereira-Moliner, J., López-Gamero, M.D. and Pertusa-Ortega
E.M., 2015. The effects of quality and environmental management on competitive
advantage: a mixed methods study in the hotel industry. Tourism Management, 50(4),
pp.41-54.
National Competitiveness Council, 2014. Ireland’s Competitiveness Challenges 2014.
[online] Available at: <http://www.competitiveness.ie/> [Accessed 3 April 2015].
Panayotou, T., 2000. Economic growth and the environment. Harvard University Working
Paper No. 56. Cambridge, MA.
Porter, M.E. and Kramer, M.R., 2011. Creating shared value. Harvard Business Review,
89(1-2), pp.62-77.
Radetzki, M., 1992. Economic growth and environment. International Trade and
Environment, 3(1), pp.121-134.
Rania, J. and Chaker, A., 2015. Environment degradation, economic growth, and energy
consumption nexus: a wavelet-windowed cross correlation approach. Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 436(3), pp.110-125.
Rozmahela, P., Grochováa, L.I. and Litzman, M., 2014. Evaluation of competitiveness in
the European Union: alternative perspectives. Procedia Economics and Finance, 12,
pp.575-581.
Ruth, M., Kalnay, E., Zeng, N., Franklin, R.S., Rivas, J. and Miralles-Wilhelm, F., 2011.
Sustainable prosperity and societal transitions: long-term modelling for anticipatory
management. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, iss. 1, pp.160-165.
World Economic Forum, 2014. The Global Competitiveness Report 2013-2014. [online]
Available at: <http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_
2013-14.pdf> [Accessed 3 April 2015].
World Wide Fund, 2006. Living Planet Report 2006. [online] Available at:
<http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/all_publications/living_planet_report/living_pla
net_report_timeline/lp_2006/> [Accessed 3 April 2015].
Xepapadeas, A., 2005. Economic growth and the environment. Handbook of Environmental
Economics, 3(1), pp.1219-1271.
Xiong, C., Yang, D., Huo, J. and Zhao, Y., 2015. The relationship between energy
consumption and economic growth and the development strategy of a low-carbon
economy in Kazakhstan. Journal of Arid Land, 7(5), pp.706-715.
Yang, W. and Meyer, K., 2015. Competitive dynamics in an emerging economy:
competitive pressures, resources, and the speed of action. Journal of Business Research,
68(6), pp.1176-1185.
Zhengge, T., 2008. The coordination of industrial growth with environment and resource,
Economic Research Journal, 2(3), pp.125-130.

