
1 Introduction
Technology innovation, dynamic environmental conditions, changing customer requirements, market’s globalization and market uncertainty are trends that
manufacturing companies cannot escape and that often lead
to an increase in complexity [86, 177, 198]. Within the last
decades, complexity has increased continuously in many
industries [242]. This is one of the biggest challenges that
manufacturing companies have to face today [71]. The
reasons are internal and external sources of complexity socalled complexity drivers.
The origin of the term complexity comes from the Latin
word ‘‘complexus’’, which means ‘‘extensive, interrelated,
confusing,
entwined
or
twisted
together’’
[71, 88, 103, 199]. This is similar to the Oxford Dictionaries [182] deﬁnition of ‘‘complex’’: Something is
complex if it is ‘‘consisting of many different and connected parts’’ and it is ‘‘not easy to analyze or understand’’. Complexity is directly connected with a system and
his terminology [117, 203, 269]. In the literature, complexity is deﬁned as part of system’s property [154]. GellMann [85] and Luhmann [163] argue that the deﬁnition of
complexity always needs a description of system’s level of


detail. The approaches of the system theory provide an
opportunity to divide a system in several subsystems and
support the determination of system’s level of detail [260].
The system theory can be attributed to the natural science,
whereby control und adjustment operations are considered
in a system’s context [15]. For the term system, several
¨
deﬁnitions are existing in the literature. Gopfert [93]
deﬁnes a system as an unit, consisting of several parts.
Ulrich [269] and Patzak [195] extend this deﬁnition and
describe a system as an entity of elements, which are
related to each other or concrete relation can be made
through the elements. Ulrich [269] argues that the elements
and their relations are signiﬁcant for system’s complexity,
and in dynamic systems the system can suppose a high
amount of different conditions. Thus, complexity would be
described by an amount of variable or elements [103].
In principle, a system is ever surrounded by an environment and can be isolated by the system boundary [260].
However, the system and its complexity are inﬂuenced by
the environment [269].
Complexity and systems are consisting of the interaction
between elements and relations [15, 163]. Thereby, the
elements are representing the tangible parts of a system,
whereas the connection between the elements is described
by relations [260]. Consequently, a system’s complexity
depends on the amount of existing parts or components, the
connections between them and the diversity of these relations and elements [71, 163]. In this context, Patzak [195]
and Meyer [174] describe elements’ diversity as variety
and relations’ diversity as connectivity. Bronner [36]
extends this deﬁnition by consideration of system’s dynamic and comprises the variation of system’s behavior
over time.
Complexity has been discussed in several ﬁelds of
research such as physics, biology, chemistry, mathematics,
computer science, economics, engineering and management as well as philosophy [30, 120]. Thus, in scientiﬁc
literature, there are many different deﬁnitions for the term
‘‘complexity’’ because the meaning is vague and ambiguous. There is no explicit, universal and widely accepted
deﬁnition [39, 71, 215]. As a result, the term ‘‘complexity’’
is often used synonymously with the term ‘‘complicated’’
[88]. Meijer [172] argues that ‘‘complexity is in the eye of
the beholder‘‘. Complexity is driven by the sensation or
perspective of an individual. What is complex to someone
might not be complex to another [103, 158].
There are two types of complexity: good and bad. The
good type of complexity is necessary. It helps a company
to gain market share and is value adding. On the other side,
bad complexity brings little value, reduces revenue and
causes excessive costs [71, 120]. Colwell [55] deﬁnes
thirty-two types of complexity in twelve different areas and
disciplines such as structural, functional, technical,

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

¨
computational and operational complexity. Gotzfried [94]
describes seventeen deﬁnitions of complexity in four different research ﬁelds such as systems theory, organizational theory, product design and operations management.
In the literature, increasing complexity is often related to
increasing costs [174]. Managing a system’s complexity
requires an optimum ﬁt between internal and external
complexity [240, 272]. The complexity management
comprises the application of the mentioned complexity
consideration with the aim of a target-oriented complexity
design [174]. Schuh [240] argues further that the complexity management comprises four tasks: designing the
necessary variety, handling variety-increasing factors,
reducing variety and controlling complex systems [272].
Generally, complexity is caused by internal and external
factors [174]. Meyer [174] deﬁnes these factors as complexity drivers. According to the Business Dictionary [47],
a driver causes a condition or decision or has an effect on
elements or a system. Complexity drivers lead to an
increased level of complexity in comparison with an initial
situation [174]. Furthermore, complexity drivers can cause
turbulences and new functional models in a system [150].
For complexity’s operationalization, Schuh [240] argues
that it can only be realized by several complexity factors,
which interact with each other.
Identifying, analyzing and understanding complexity
drivers as main elements related to complexity are the ﬁrst
step to develop and implement a clear strategy to handle
complexity [177, 255]. Without an idea of complexity
drivers, it would be difﬁcult to develop an effective complexity strategy [255]. Heydari and Dalili [116] argue that a
research in complexity management needs to know what
the key drivers of complexity in a system are. The management of complexity is a strategic issue for companies to
be competitive [44, 177, 240]. In the study ‘‘Managing
Complexity in Automotive Engineering’’. Erkayhan [72]
concludes that the complexity drivers are the main
adjusting levers for improvements of the company’s success. Thus, complexity drivers play a signiﬁcant role for
complexity management, because they describe a system’s
complexity and help to evaluate and handle it.
Previous literature studies about complexity drivers
have been done by Meyer [174], Serdarasan [255, 256] and
Wildemann and Voigt [289] and comprise a time period of
20 years (1991–2011). They cover complexity drivers on
speciﬁc issues such as logistics, supply chains and general
in manufacturing companies. In total, 99 literature sources
such as articles, books and PhD theses in the research
period between 1991 and 2011 form their research. Furthermore, 281 complexity drivers are identiﬁed in total.
Although these literature studies cover a lot of literature
sources and complexity drivers in the referred ﬁelds, a
example, the authors in the previous literature studies have
not described speciﬁc research questions, databases, search
terms and synthesizing methods. In addition, not all authors
provide a comparison between their ﬁndings and the ﬁndings of other literature sources. However, these are essential to determine the current state of knowledge about a
particular research issue in a literature review. So they do
not fulﬁll the requirements of a literature review in general.
This paper’s purpose is a literature review of complexity
drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value
chain, including the ﬁelds product development, procurement/purchasing, logistics, production, order processing/
distribution/sale, internal supply chain and remanufacturing, which fulﬁlls the mentioned requirements.
The contribution of this review is to develop additional
knowledge for science and practice by describing what is
currently known on the issue of complexity drivers. From
scientiﬁc perspective, this literature review presents a
current state of the art about complexity drivers and gives
the researcher a ﬁrst insight and general understanding
about complexity drivers, before starting a research project
in this ﬁeld. It closes a currently existing gap in scientiﬁc
literature. The literature review can be used for a dissertation or research proposal to give an overview about the
issue of complexity drivers and is helpful for researchers,
who have no prior knowledge in this ﬁeld. Further, it helps
the researcher to avoid time-wasting and research effort by
‘‘reinventing the wheel’’. Within this research, the gaps for
future research are pointed out. Based on this review,
researchers can build new ideas and theories for their own
research. The research methodology, including research
questions, databases and synthesizing methods, is described in detail to increase transparency. This enables the
researcher to reproduce the ﬁndings. The literature review
provides a comprehensive survey of signiﬁcant literature
(e.g., academic journal articles, books, essays, PhD theses,
conference proceedings) and their results, based on analyzing, synthesizing and summarizing the existing literature. Furthermore, the different literature sources and the
trends of complexity drivers in the literature and in the
different ﬁelds (general in manufacturing companies and/or
along the value chain) over the last 25 years are described.
The trends show the researcher how essential the topic
complexity drivers is in the literature and that it is thus
interesting for future research. However, interesting topics
for academic people do not have to be important for
practice. To avoid this trade-off, we also include the
practical perspective in our point of view. In addition,
different deﬁnitions of complexity drivers are analyzed and
described. A new overall deﬁnition of complexity drivers is

Page 3 of 66

25

presented. Furthermore, the existing approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization are identiﬁed and speciﬁed according to their
focus. The identiﬁed complexity drivers were clustered in
aggregated complexity driver’s main categories according
to their characteristics to provide a general classiﬁcation
system without overlaps. From practical perspective, this
literature review gives the practitioner a ﬁrst insight and
understanding about the phenomena of complexity drivers
and their importance. In several empirical studies, for
example from Wildemann and Voigt [289], Gießmann [88]
and Gießmann and Lasch [89], the issue complexity in
companies and its drivers were analyzed. The result was
that companies are aware of complexity and some of its
causes but often do not know how to handle it, because of a
lack of speciﬁc methods or tools for complexity driver’s
identiﬁcation, operationalization or visualization. This
study answers the following manager’s questions ‘‘What
are complexity drivers?’’ ‘‘Why they are so important for
me?’’ and ‘‘How can I identify, operationalize and visualize
complexity drivers?’’ by providing an overall deﬁnition
about complexity drivers and an overview about the
existing approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation,
operationalization and visualization. Beyond, the practitioner gets an overall selection of different approaches and
their focuses and can choose the right one for solving his
task or problem. Furthermore, a list of theoretical existing
complexity drivers, which were found in the literature, are
described, so the management has a general overview
about complexity drivers and can compare these ﬁndings
with their own complexity drivers to identify communalities and differences as well as get a ﬁrst indication. This
review collects existing approaches for complexity driver’s
identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization based on
the literature. Therefore, it can be used as a basis to gain
ﬁrst implications about complexity drivers, their identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization. Further
research will be needed to create helpful advice for practitioners to detect complexity issues as well as to present
methodological support to detect causes of complexity and
their effects.
This literature review is structured as follows: In Sect. 2,
the paper gives an overview about the research method.
Some deﬁnitions of literature reviews are disclosed, and a
framework for constructing a literature review is speciﬁed.
Section 3 presents the literature review about complexity
drivers with an overview about different deﬁnitions and
approaches for identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization. The most discussed complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value chain are
described. Section 4 concludes the paper and closes the
research gap with implication for future research.


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

2 Research method
2.1 Research methodology and boundary deﬁnition
The aim of this study is a systematic, explicit and reproducible literature review about complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value chain, which
provides deﬁnitions of complexity drivers, and existing
approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization. The existing literature was
identiﬁed, evaluated and synthesized by using qualitative
data analysis to point out the existing literature sources and
their focuses as well as the trends and issues. The literature
results are compared with each other. To provide a comprehensive literature review, we used the methodology of
Fink [78] and structured our article according to him. Literature reviews have been used for many years in scientiﬁc
research and scholar ﬁndings. They are a long-standing
tradition, but the deﬁnitions are tight [43]. Fink [78] deﬁnes
a literature review as a ‘‘systematic, explicit and reproducible method for identifying, evaluating, and synthesizing
the existing body of completed and recorded work produced
by researchers, scholars, and practitioners’’. Brewerton and
Millward [34] describe a literature review as a content
analysis that uses qualitative and quantitative techniques to
ﬁnd structural and content criteria. According to Meredith
[173], a literature review is a ‘‘summary of the existing literature by ﬁnding research focus, trends, and issues‘‘.
Within this paper, we follow the deﬁnitions of Fink [78],
Brewerton and Millward [34] and Meredith [173].
Fink [78] divides a literature review into seven tasks.
The ﬁrst step is selecting the research questions. Research
questions are precisely stated questions, which guide the
literature review. The next step is to select the required
sources such as bibliographic or article databases, Web
sites and other sources to determine relevant literature.
Before starting the literature review, the researcher has to
deﬁne the search terms. To review the databases and search
terms, the researcher should ask experts or other
researchers. The next steps are applying practical and
methodological screening criteria to identify and select the
relevant literature from the entity of found literature. To
reject irrelevant articles, the researcher has to screen the
literature by setting practical and methodological criteria.
According to Fink [78], the ﬁrst step is to deﬁne the
research questions. The beneﬁt of research questions is that
they already contain the words the reviewer needs to search
for online to ﬁnd relevant literature. These words or search
terms are called key words, descriptors or identiﬁers [76].
For this literature review, we determined the following
research questions including the relevant key word ‘‘complexity driver’’:

123

Fig. 1 Paraphrases of the term complexity driver and their
intersection

RQ1: What are the different deﬁnitions of complexity
drivers that currently exist in manufacturing companies
and along the value chain?
RQ2: What methods are applied in the literature for
complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and
visualization?
RQ3: What complexity drivers occur in manufacturing
companies and along the value chain?
Before conducting a literature research, it is necessary to
deﬁne the right search terms and databases. The search
terms are based on the words that frame the research
questions. In the literature, several paraphrases for complexity driver exist. These paraphrases are usually a combination of the terms factor, indicator, source, parameter,
variable, symptom, phenomenon, dimension, force and
property and the term complexity driver (see Sect. 3.2).
When comparing the meaning of these different word
combinations, it can be seen that the lowest common
denominator is complexity driver (see Fig. 1). Thus, we
limited our literature research to the search term complexity driver.
A researcher must use a ‘‘particular grammar and
logic’’ to conduct a search that will acquire the appropriate
publications [78]. One possibility is to combine the key
words and other terms with Boolean operators such as
AND, OR and NOT. Further, the operator NEAR can be
used to identify the literature where the keywords have a
close connection to each other. The application of Boolean
operators depends on the speciﬁc database. To extend the
amount of relevant literature, it is also necessary to search
in different languages. In our research, we search in English- and German-language literature. This has two reasons:
First, English is the global language and applied in the
scientiﬁc world to provide research ﬁndings worldwide.
Second, during our literature research we started with

25

Table 1 General framework of literature collection
Focus

Database

Search terms

Date

Results

■ General in manufacturing
companies

EBSCOhost

('Komplexitätstreiber' OR (Treiber N3 Komplexität)) AND …
('complexity driver*' OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND …

April &
May ‘16

401

■ Product Development

Emerald

("Komplexitätstreiber" OR "Treiber d* Komplexität") AND …
("complexity driver" OR "driver of complexity") AND …

April &
May ‘16

44

■ Procurement / Purchasing

GENIOS /
WISO

("Komplexitätstreiber" OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexität)) AND …
("complexity driver*" OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND …

April &
May ‘16

1001

■ Logistics

Google Scholar ("Komplexitätstreiber" OR "Treiber d* Komplexität") AND …
("complexity driver*" OR "driver* of complexity") AND …

May ‘16

3234

■ Production

IEEE Xplore

("Komplexitätstreiber" OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexität)) AND …
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND …

May ‘16

2203

■ Order Processing /
Distribution / Sale

JSTOR

("Komplexitätstreiber" OR ("Treiber Komplexität"~5)) AND …
("complexity driver" OR ("driver complexity"~5)) AND …

May &
June ‘16

146

■ Supply Chain

ScienceDirect

("Komplexitätstreiber*" OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexität)) AND …
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND …

May &
June ‘16

1726

■ Remanufacturing

SpringerLink

(Komplexitätstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexität)) AND …
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND …

May &
June ‘16

2670

Total: 11425

ces with references to German-language sources. This was
another reason to extend the research in German-language
literature.
According to Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill [219] the
ﬁnalized search terms are identiﬁed through an iterative
cycle starting with one key word and adding more in the
process of research in order to summarize all necessary and
possible literature and results. Furthermore, the search
terms are deﬁned in English and German and then formulated more general to extend the results and to prevent
the elimination of important articles. We started our
¨
research by using the key words ‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ and
‘‘complexity driver’’ and formulated the search term
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber OR complexity driver’’. After
¨
reviewing the found literature, we found out that a lot of
¨
sources also used the term ‘‘Treiber der Komplexitat’’ or
‘‘driver of complexity,’’ so we added these terms to our ﬁrst
search term and received the new term ‘‘Komplexitatstreiber OR Treiber der Komplexitat OR complexity
¨
¨
driver OR driver of complexity’’. During the following
search process, it became clear that sometimes these keywords are separated by other words so we implemented the
NEAR operator to cover all existing and relevant literature.
The ﬁnalized search terms are described in Table 1.
After deﬁning the right search terms, a researcher must
examine all sources systematically by using online bibliographic or article databases. Databases are often specialized in a speciﬁc research area. The research for this paper
was performed in English and German by using the following eight English and German databases: EBSCOhost,

Emerald, GENIOS/WISO, Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore,
JSTOR, ScienceDirect and SpringerLink.
The used databases were also deﬁned through an iterative cycle. In our research, we started by using the databases EBSCOhost, JSTOR, GENIOS/WISO and Google
Scholar. EBSCOhost and JSTOR are one of the biggest
databases for academic research and connected with
numerous other databases. During our research process on
Google Scholar, some literature sources were found on
other speciﬁc databases such as Emerald, IEEE Xplore,
ScienceDirect and SpringerLink. Thus, these databases
were also included in the research process.
Table 1 shows the general framework of our literature
collections including the research focus, applied databases
and search terms. Furthermore, the framework contains
the results and search dates at an aggregate level to
provide ﬁrst insights. In our research, the time period was
restricted between January 01, 1900, and December 31,
2015. The different frameworks with all precise search
terms, results and searching dates are shown in ‘‘Appendix’’ (Table 13).
2.2 Research segmentation and overview
The search resulted in 11,425 literature sources including
research papers from journals, conference proceedings,
working papers, books, essays and PhD theses. However,
several literature sources are found repeatedly.
According to Fink [78], literature research and analysis
always accumulate many publications, but only a few are


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

Categories
(combined with RQ)

Identified literature sources with Author´s name(s)
Source #1

Source #2

Source #3

…

Source #n

Definition of complexity drivers (RQ1)
… identification

Methods for
complexity
drivers’ …
(RQ2)

… operationalization
… visualization
General
Product development
Procurement / Purchasing
Value Chain

Complexity
drivers in
manufacturing
companies
(RQ3)

Logistics
Production
Order processing / Distribution / Sale
Supply chain
Remanufacturing

Fig. 2 Synthesis matrix for literature’s synthesizing

relevant. Consequently, it is necessary to screen and synthesize the results.
In this paper, the researched literature was synthesized
based on the qualitative content analysis and the aforementioned research questions. The content analysis is used
to analyze the literature and to identify the occurrences of
speciﬁed information systematically. Within the qualitative
content analysis, the information is extracted, formatted
and evaluated to answer the research questions. The most
important aspect is the extraction of the information to gain
the required information. Extraction means to read the text,
separating the text in different parts, and to decide which of
the given text parts contain information that is relevant for
the researcher. The relevant information is then assigned to
previously deﬁned categories [92]. In the qualitative content analysis, this assignment is called coding and is
induced by a coding unit. The coding unit is a text passage,
which is connected to a certain category or content. The
assignment to the deﬁned categories is performed by the
researcher, called coder [152]. However, the researcher and
his understanding and interpretation inﬂuence the extraction and text interpretation [92, 152]. When the coding
process is done by more than one researcher, a common
understanding and interpretation is required [152]. The
deﬁned categories are connected with the research questions and are not ﬁxed. During the extraction process, they
can be altered and new categories can also be added. As a
result of the extraction, a vast amount of data are collected

123

which can be used for information formatting and evaluation to answer the research questions. For information
evaluation, the researcher compares the different literature
sources to identify communalities and differences [92].
For analyzing and synthesizing the literature in our
research, we followed the approach of the qualitative
content analysis and deﬁned in the ﬁrst step twelve categories based on our three research questions. The categories were implemented in a synthesis matrix (see
Fig. 2). The synthesis matrix helps the researcher to
organize the identiﬁed literature and their different contents on an issue.
In the next step, we started the extraction process by
screening the title and abstracts of the identiﬁed papers,
books, etc. and eliminate sources without focus in manufacturing companies or the value chain. For example,
papers focused on ﬁnancial, insurance or biological issues
were eliminated. Furthermore, we excluded all papers that
were found multiple times. Within this procedure, the total
amount of found literature sources could be reduced
signiﬁcantly.
Then, we started our detailed literature analysis by
searching for the key words ‘‘complexity driver’’ or ‘‘driver
of […] complexity’’ and analyzed the content around the key
words. The key words were highlighted in the text, and we
made notes about our ﬁrst impressions and thoughts. Afterward, we read all data repeatedly to achieve an overview of

Table 2 List of journals, books and papers published during the
period 1991–2015
Literature source

Time horizon

Journals

1991–2015

68

Books

1993–2015

41

Essay

1991–2015

41

PhD theses

1991–2015

55

Conference proceedings

2010–2015

13

Working papers

2000–2012

11

Newspaper
Internet (Web sites)

1994–2009
2005–2014

4
2

Total

Number of publications

235

regarding their content. The parts with relevant information
about complexity drivers were assigned to the previously
deﬁned categories in our synthesis matrix. The assignment of
a speciﬁc information to a certain category (coding) was
induced by the particular text passage (coding unit). Parts
without relevant information were ignored. As a result of our
extraction process, a vast amount of data from 235 different
literature sources were collected in a table to answer our
research questions. For information evaluation, we compared the found information in each category to identify
communalities or differences.
The synthesizing process resulted ﬁnally in 235 relevant
papers. These papers were published in journal articles
(68), books (41), essays (41), PhD theses (55), conference
proceedings (13), working papers (11), newspaper (4) and
Web sites (2) in the ﬁeld of complexity drivers in the time
period 1991–2015 (see Table 2).
Before 1991, no relevant literature sources in regard to
the issue complexity drivers were found in our research.
One reason could be attributed to the development of the
scientiﬁc research in the ﬁeld complexity management
[90]. According to Gießmann and Lasch [90], complexity
management’s development process can be separated in

25

three steps: variant management, complexity management
in a narrower sense and integrated complexity management (see Fig. 3). These steps do not appear strictly in
sequence but also parallel.
Due to a change from seller’s to buyer’s market, the
companies extend their product portfolio. In consequence,
the product portfolio reached a volume that could hardly
be managed by the companies [90]. Therefore, variant
management was developed to handle product’s complexity. Variant management’s objective is to combine
variant’s diversity and proﬁtability [82, 90]. Product’s
amount and property was one complexity driver. Within
the complexity management, the focus lays more and
more upon the processes. Processes were identiﬁed as a
further complexity driver. In the third step, the upstream
and downstream processes and stages were integrated in
the focus. Furthermore, the interdependencies between the
determining factors, the initiated approaches and company’s subsystems were determined. The integrated
complexity management provides a concept for an effective handling of complexity problems [90]. Therefore, it
can be assumed that complexity drivers come more and
more into scientiﬁc focus at the transition between variant
management and complexity management in the early
1990s of the last century.
Another reason could be attributed to the deﬁnition and
understanding of the term ‘‘complexity driver’’. In the literature, complexity drivers were deﬁned in many ways (see
Sect. 3.2). For the authors, complexity drivers have an
inﬂuence on something and are responsible for increasing
complexity in a system. In our research, we found out that
the ﬁrst deﬁnition about complexity drivers was speciﬁed
by Schmidt [227] in the year 1992.
In variant management, the sources, which were
responsible for increasing variant diversity and complexity,
were called ‘‘variant driver’’ [240]. Thus, it is an indication
for us that the term complexity driver can be attributed to
the term variant driver.

Fig. 3 Complexity
management’s evolution [85]


3 Literature review about complexity drivers
3.1 Overview about literature research results
Table 2 presents an overview about the identiﬁed literature
sources and the number of publications in the ﬁeld of
complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along
the value chain (published between 1991 and 2015). More
than 50% of the publications about complexity drivers
were published in journals and PhD theses. Thus, complexity drivers have a high importance in scientiﬁc
research. Complexity drivers are also mentioned in several
books, essays, conference proceedings as well as working
papers with a practical and/or scientiﬁc purpose. Working
papers are publications from companies or universities
with a practical and/or scientiﬁc purpose. In this research,
most of the identiﬁed working papers are practically oriented. Newspapers and the Internet are also literature
sources for complexity drivers. After analyzing the different literature sources and their focuses, we conclude that
complexity drivers have a high relevance in practice as
well as in scientiﬁc research.
As already mentioned, in our research we identiﬁed 235
papers about complexity drivers in the literature and clustered them according to their content in nineteen clusters
(see Table 3). Building the nineteen clusters was an iterative process. We started by comparing the papers according
to their content and generated the clusters based on their
communalities and differences. One hundred and sixty
papers (68%) are only focused on complexity drivers
(Cluster #10), nineteen papers (8%) are focused on complexity drivers and complexity driver’s deﬁnition (Cluster
#12), and twelve papers (5%) are focused only on complexity drivers and approaches for complexity driver’s
identiﬁcation (Cluster #14). Furthermore, 169 papers
(72%) are written in German and 66 (28%) in English.
In addition, we discovered that 212 (90%) of the total
amount of 235 papers describe speciﬁc complexity drivers
in manufacturing companies and along the value chain
(Cluster #10–#19). One hundred and ﬁfty-four papers
(73%) are written in German and ﬁfty-eight (27%) in
English. Twenty-three papers (Cluster #1–#9) comprise
only general information about complexity drivers without
the description of speciﬁc complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value chain.
For separating the literature into the two parts ‘‘manufacturing companies’’ and ‘‘along the value chain‘‘, we
analyzed the 212 literature sources and the identiﬁed
complexity drivers regarding their focus. We followed the
complexity driver’s assignment to certain categories that
the paper’s authors used. If they describe complexity drivers, which belong to different parts of the value chain, we

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

followed their assignment and used this information in our
study. We assumed complexity drivers, which are not
assigned to a certain part of the value chain by the authors,
to be general in manufacturing companies. This separation
is important for the management in a company, because
higher management (e.g., CEO or director) needs a vast
overview of the whole company and the occurring complexity drivers, whereas managers of certain departments
(e.g., senior manager, department manager, team leader)
need an overview about complexity drivers in their speciﬁc
ﬁelds of interest.
Previous literature studies about complexity drivers
have been done by four authors with different objectives:
Meyer [174], Serdarasan [255, 256] and Wildemann and
Voigt [289]. Principally, it can be distinguished between
literature review and literature overview/survey. A literature overview/survey reviews the existing literature in a
particular ﬁeld of interest on a surface level. However, a
literature review analyzes and evaluates the existing literature more in detail as an overview/survey and gives the
reader a better understanding of the research [258]. Serdarasan [255, 256] signiﬁes their literature studies as reviews and gives a detail overview of the ‘‘literature on
supply chain complexity and its drivers’’. The literature
studies of Meyer [174] and Wildemann and Voigt [289]
refer to a literature research only on complexity drivers and
can be assigned to the category literature overview/survey.
In his PhD thesis, Meyer [174] describes the state of the
art regarding speciﬁc complexity drivers and their inﬂuence on increasing complexity. Before reviewing the literature, Meyer [174] describes his understanding of the
term complexity drivers and states that complexity drivers
are factors, which inﬂuence the system’s complexity and
are responsible for changing system’s complexity level
[174]. The literature results are subdivided by Meyer [174]
into two categories:
Category #1: General complexity drivers and their
inﬂuences on increasing complexity in a company.
Category #2: Major complexity drivers and their inﬂuences regarding logistics.
According to Meyer [174], the complexity drivers and
their inﬂuences in category #1 are based on variant management. They concern mostly product complexity and
product complexity’s area of inﬂuence. As a result of the
literature research, Meyer [174] identiﬁes nineteen literature sources and describes 127 complexity drivers in
fourteen driver categories. In summary, Meyer [174] offers
a table, showing the identiﬁed complexity drivers, their
appearances in the literature and their inﬂuences. However,
he does not describe a comparison between the different

•

•
•

7

2

5

Number of German
literature sources

Number of English
literature sources

8

23

31

Total

Cluster #18

Cluster #19

12

24

36

5

12

17

•

•

4

14

18

•

•
•

•

Cluster #16
Cluster #17
•

•

•
•

Cluster #14

Cluster #15

58

154

212

•

•

•
•

•
•

•

•

Cluster #13

•
•
•

3

•

235

2

2

7
2

1

12

5

19

2

160

1

•

•

Cluster #12

Cluster #11

Cluster #10

Cluster #9

Cluster #8

•

1

•

8
•

•

Cluster #7

•

•

Cluster #6

1

•

•

Cluster #5

•

1

•

•

Cluster #4
•

3

•

Cluster #3

1

•

•

•

Cluster #2

Overview about
complexity
drivers

Cluster #1

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

Total

RQ2 approach for…

RQ1

General statement
about complexity
drivers

RQ3

Results

Content of the literature source based on literature’s analysis

4

Paper’s classiﬁcation
according to its
content

Table 3 Paper’s classiﬁcation according to their content

100

0.9

0.9

3.0
0.9

0.4

5.1

2.1

8.1

0.9

68.1

1.3

0.4

0.4

3.4

0.4

0.4

1.3

0.4

1.7

%

169

2

2

5
1

0

8

2

16

0

118

3

0

1

6

1

1

1

1

1

Number of
German
literature sources

66

0

0

2
1

1

4

3

3

2

42

0

1

0

2

0

0

2

0

3

Number of
English literature
sources

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 9 of 66
25


only on general complexity drivers and complexity drivers
regarding logistics. Complexity drivers in other parts along
the value chain are not described and compared with his
ﬁndings. In addition, Meyer [174] does not describe
speciﬁc approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation,
operationalization and visualization. No research questions,
databases, search terms and synthesizing methods are
determined.
Serdarasan [255, 256] published two review papers
concerning supply chain complexity drivers. The ﬁrst paper
was published in the proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Computers & Industrial Engineering in
2011. The second paper was published in the journal of
Computers & Industrial Engineering in 2013. In her
papers, Serdarasan [255, 256] reviews the ‘‘typical complexity drivers that are faced in different types of supply
chain and presents the complexity driver and solution
strategy pairings in the form of a matrix’’. The information
was extracted from real-life supply chain situations and
gathered from multiple existing sources such as interviews,
observations, reports and archives.
In the ﬁrst paper, Serdarasan [255] reviews the literature
on supply chain complexity drivers, because in her opinion,
this is the ﬁrst step in developing a clear strategy for
complexity handling. Before reviewing the literature, Serdarasan [256] analyzed the three different types of supply
chain complexity (static, dynamic and decision making)
and describes her understanding of the term complexity
drivers. In her understanding, ‘‘a supply chain complexity
driver is any property of a supply chain that increases its
complexity’’ and corresponds with the different types of
supply chain complexity [255]. Furthermore, Serdarasan
[255] classiﬁes the complexity drivers ‘‘according to their
origin in internal, supply/demand interface, and external/
environmental drivers’’. In total, twenty-three literature
sources are identiﬁed and twenty-seven complexity drivers
are described in the three driver categories internal, supply/
demand interface and external. In addition, Serdarasan
[255] gives an overview of twenty-seven different solution
strategies for handling speciﬁc complexity drivers. However, the information about all references and the systematic review results are not described, because of ‘‘space
restrictions’’ in the conference paper [255].
In summary, in her ﬁrst paper Serdarasan [255] offers an
overview, showing the identiﬁed complexity drivers and
their overall origin categories, and describes some solution
strategies for complexity driver’s handling. However, she
does not describe a comparison between the different literature sources and their ﬁndings. Furthermore, she
focused her research only on supply chain complexity
drivers. Complexity drivers in other parts along the value
chain are not described and compared with her ﬁndings.

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

In the second paper, Serdarasan [256] enhances the content of her ﬁrst paper and reviews the ‘‘typical complexity
drivers that are faced in different types of supply chains and
present the complexity driver and solution strategy pairings
based on good industry practices‘‘. Analogously to the ﬁrst
paper, Serdarasan [256] distinguishes in the ﬁrst step the
supply chain complexity in the already mentioned three
types: static, dynamic and decision making. Then, she
describes her understanding of the term complexity drivers
and combines it with the different types of supply chain
complexity and their origin (internal, supply/demand interface and external/environmental). In the next step, Serdarasan [256] analyzes the identiﬁed thirty-eight literature
sources focused on supply chain complexity according to
their type and origin. As a result of the analysis, Serdarasan
[256] states that the related literature is mostly focused on
internal and interface complexities. The number of studies
dealing with external complexity drivers is smaller, because
‘‘external drivers are outside the system boundary of the
supply chain’’. According to the three types of supply chain
complexity, the literature is mostly focused on static and
dynamic types. Decision-making complexity is also much
less in the focus of the literature. Based on her literature
research, Serdarasan [256] developes a classiﬁcation of
supply chain complexity drivers according to their type and
origin. Thirty-two supply chain complexity drivers are
described in nine complexity driver categories. For complexity drivers handling, Serdarasan [256] extends the
overview of different solution strategies from twenty-seven
in the ﬁrst paper to thirty-three in the journal paper.
Summarizing the second paper, Serdarasan [256] presents a table, consisting of the identiﬁed complexity drivers, which were clustered according to their type and
origin. Furthermore, she compares the different literature
sources and their ﬁndings to identify communalities and
differences. Analogously to the ﬁrst paper, Serdarasan
[256] focuses her research only on supply chain complexity
drivers. Complexity drivers in other parts along the value
chain are not described and compared with her ﬁndings.
In addition, Serdarasan [255, 256] does not describe
speciﬁc approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation,
operationalization and visualization in her two papers.
Beyond, no research questions, databases, search terms and
synthesizing methods are determined.
The objective of Wildemann and Voigt’s research [289]
is to identify internal and external complexity drivers in
manufacturing companies with the aim of quantifying
company’s product portfolio, process and structure complexity. As a result, a company’s complexity proﬁle can be
compared across other companies. The basis of Wildemann
and Voigt’s [289] overview is a comprehensive literature
Voigt [289] analyzed the term complexity extensively to
develop their own deﬁnitions for internal and external
complexity. According to Wildemann and Voigt [289],
external complexity is the sum of all parameters in a
company that cannot be inﬂuenced or can only be indirectly inﬂuenced. External complexity is constitutive traits
for a company’s processes that product program and the
company’s structure exhibit. Their dynamics are only
predictable to some extent. Internal complexity is the sum
of all material and immaterial units in a company and their
static and dynamic links that express the external requirements within the company borders.
For complexity driver’s understanding, Wildemann and
Voigt [289] cite the deﬁnition of Piller that complexity
drivers are a ‘‘phenomenon, which actuate a system to
increase their own complexity’’.
Based on this understanding, Wildemann and Voigt
[289] perform a comprehensive literature research
focused on complexity drivers and separate the identiﬁed
complexity drivers according to their origin into internal
and external categories. As a result of their literature
research, Wildemann and Voigt [289] identify seventeen
literature sources about complexity drivers and identify
thirty-two external and sixty-three internal complexity
drivers, which are allocated in eleven driver categories.
Wildemann and Voigt [289] criticize that literature’s
assignment of complexity drivers to different driver
clusters show some contradictions. In addition to their
literature research, Wildemann and Voigt [289] analyze
twenty-seven case studies to extend literature’s results
about complexity drivers with complexity drivers identiﬁed in practice. The case studies comprise different
branches to provide a differentiated overview about
external drivers and their internal impacts. In summary,
115 different complexity drivers are identiﬁed and
clustered according to nine main driver categories (three
external and six internal). Then, the results are visualized in a ‘‘complexity driver tree’’ and evaluated in a
further empirical study to identify the most relevant
complexity drivers for practice. As a result, the total
amount of complexity drivers is condensed to an amount
of complexity drivers, which are easy to handle in
practice. Based on expert interviews, Wildemann and
Voigt [289] ﬁnally identify ten relevant external and
twenty relevant internal complexity drivers. The concentrated complexity drivers are the basis for an additional empirical research by online questioning. Within
the questioning, the trends of internal and external
complexity drivers, their relevance and inﬂuences on
company’s processes are investigated. The results from
literature and empirical research are the inputs for the
development of a complexity index [289].

Page 11 of 66

25

In summary, Wildemann and Voigt [289] present in the
ﬁrst step a literature overview about complexity drivers
general in manufacturing companies. The identiﬁed drivers
are clustered according to origin in internal and external
drivers. The authors compare the different literature sources and their ﬁndings to identify communalities and differences. Then, they compare the literature results with the
results from empirical research to extend the total amount
of complexity drivers. The results are visualized in a
complexity tree. The practical relevant drivers are identiﬁed through expert interviews. However, Wildemann and
Voigt [289] focus their research only on general complexity drivers. Complexity drivers in other parts of the
company and along the value chain are not described and
compared with their ﬁndings. In addition, Wildemann and
Voigt [289] do not describe speciﬁc approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation and operationalization. Only
one method for complexity driver’s visualization is
described. For literature research, no research questions,
databases, search terms and synthesizing methods are
determined.
Table 4 summarizes the results of our analysis according to the previous literature studies about complexity
drivers. The table shows a list of existing reviews and
overviews/surveys and gives an overview of their focus,
research period and results about complexity drivers. Furthermore, the identiﬁed literature studies are analyzed and
evaluated based on the requirements of a systematic,
explicit and reproducible literature review, described by
Fink [78].
The evaluation is based on the following two criteria:
fulﬁlled (??) and not fulﬁlled (-). Table 4 gives an
overview about the determination of the two evaluation
criteria in the following two categories:
•
•

Determination of research questions, databases, search
terms and synthesizing methods.
Comparison of literature ﬁndings with other literature
sources or empirical research data.

As a result of Table 4 and the analysis of the previous
literature studies, the existing studies cover complexity
drivers on speciﬁc issues such as logistics, supply chains or
general in manufacturing companies (see Table 4).
A vast number of literature sources and complexity
drivers in the referred ﬁeld are covered in these literature
studies, although a systematic, explicit and reproducible
method for identiﬁcation, evaluation and synthesizing the
existing literature about complexity drivers is not described
[78]. In the previous literature studies, no research questions, databases, search terms and synthesizing methods are
described (see Table 4). Furthermore, the literature ﬁndings are only compared in two of the four studies to
identify communalities and differences to improve reader’s


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

Table 4 List of existing reviews or overview about complexity drivers and their results
Author(s)

Meyer [174]

Serdarasan [255]

Wildemann and Voigt [289]

Serdarasan [256]

Type of literature study

Overview

Review

Overview

Review

Publication’s language

German

English

German

English

Focus
General in manufacturing companies

•

•

Product development
Procurement/purchasing
Logistics

•

Production
Order processing/distribution/sale
•

Internal supply chain

•

Remanufacturing
General in value chain
Research period

1992–2004

1998–2011

1991–2010

1992–2011

Identiﬁed literature sources

19

25

17

38

Complexity driver’s deﬁnitions

1

1

1

1

Described complexity drivers

127

27

95

32

Complexity driver categories

14

3

11

9

Research questions

–

–

–

–

Databases

–

–

–

–

Search terms

–

–

–

–

Synthesizing methods

–

–

–

–

Other literature sources

–

–

??

??

Empirical research data

–

–

??

–

Literature review’s results: amount of…

Determination of … by the author(s)

Literature ﬁndings’ comparison with…

Evaluation criteria: fulﬁlled (??), precise research questions, databases, search terms and synthesizing methods, are described. The literature
ﬁndings are compared with other literature sources or empirical research data; not fulﬁlled (-), precise research questions, databases, search
terms and synthesizing methods are not described. The literature ﬁndings are not compared with other literature sources or empirical research
data

understanding in a particular ﬁeld of research. These are
essential to determine the current state of knowledge about
a particular research issue in a literature review according
to Fink [78].
The existing literature studies only describe complexity
drivers in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of manufacturing companies. A
more general overview about complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value chain does not
exist yet. Furthermore, no different deﬁnitions of complexity drivers are identiﬁed, compared and discussed in
the previous literature studies. Meyer [174], Serdarasan
[255, 256] and Wildemann and Voigt [289] provide only
one deﬁnition for complexity drivers. In our opinion, a
more extensive point of view is necessary to identify all
characteristics of complexity drivers. Complexity driver’s
understanding is the ﬁrst step in managing complexity (see
Sect. 3.1).

123

In the existing studies, no approaches for complexity
driver’s identiﬁcation or operationalization are described. A
speciﬁc and target-oriented complexity management is
based on identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization
of a system’s complexity drivers (see Sect. 3.2). For science
and practice, it is important to know that different methods
for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and
visualization exist in the literature. Only Wildemann and
Voigt [289] describe a method for complexity driver’s
visualization in their research paper. However, this method is
not applicable in all cases; thus, further methods for complexity driver’s visualization are required.
In our research paper, we want to close the referred gaps
by a systematic, explicit and reproducible literature review

NI

25

Total amount of literature sources about
complexity drivers between 1991 and 2015:
NT: 235
Amount of literature sources
with information about complexity drivers in
manufacturing companies and along the value chain:
NI: 212
Amount
of literature parts focused on
general in manufacturing
companies:
NG: 108

NG ∩ VC:
11

Amount
of literature parts focused on
the value chain:
NVC: 115

Amount
of literature sources
with only general
information about
complexity drivers:
NG: 23

NG VC:
223

Fig. 4 Overview about literature analysis’ results

According to the literature, the existing studies are
only focused on speciﬁc issues such as logistics, supply
chain or general in the company (see Table 4). One of
this paper’s purposes is to present an overview about
complexity drivers in all aspects along the value chain
and in manufacturing companies in attempt to close this
literature gap. Furthermore, the results are compared
with each other to identify communalities and differences between complexity drivers general in manufacturing companies and along the value chain. In addition,
we identify and analyze all existing deﬁnitions of complexity drivers and develop a new overall deﬁnition to
increase the understanding of complexity drivers. Our
objective is to fulﬁll all requirements of a literature
review in general.
To achieve this aim, the identiﬁed 235 literature sources
(NT) were analyzed in detail (Fig. 4). Twenty-three papers
are focused only on general information about complexity
drivers. As already mentioned, 212 papers (NI) contain
information about complexity drivers in manufacturing
companies and along the value chain. Within these 212
papers, 108 literature parts (NG) can be identiﬁed that deal
with complexity divers general in manufacturing companies. Furthermore, 115 literature parts (NVC) are focused
on complexity drivers along the value chain. Eleven papers
describe both parts (NG\NVC).
After identiﬁcation and segmentation of the researched
literature, the next step was to analyze the overall trend of
all literature regarding complexity drivers in manufacturing
companies and along the value chain (Fig. 5). Further, the
results were separated in German and English publications.

Figure 5 presents the total amount of publications regarding complexity drivers published in the time period
1991–2015.
The represented trend shows an increased interest in
complexity drivers throughout the last 10 years, because
they are the basement of a target-oriented complexity
management. It can be derived that complexity drivers
attract more and more focus in scientiﬁc research.
Another reason for the increase numbers of literature
sources might be the increased amount of included literature sources in databases over time. For example, the
database EBSCOhost enhanced their connection to other
databases over the last years, and thus, it covers more
and more books, journals and conference papers.
Seventy-four percent of all publications were published
between 2004 and 2015. Furthermore, 72% of all publications were published in German. However, the
amount of English publications increased continuously in
the last 6 years.
As already mentioned, 212 papers (90% of all literature
sources) describe speciﬁc complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value chain. After analyzing and synthesizing these 212 papers, we identiﬁed 223
different literature parts with complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the value chain (see Fig. 4
and Table 14 in ‘‘Appendix’’). Thus, eleven authors have
described more than one ﬁeld of complexity drivers in their
publications (see Fig. 4). For example, Mayer [170], Meyer
[174] and Lasch and Gießmann [155] describe in their
publications complexity drivers general in manufacturing
companies and drivers in the ﬁeld logistics.


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

Fig. 5 Trend of all literature
sources about complexity
drivers between 1991 and 2015

Fig. 6 Trend of the literature
about general complexity
drivers in manufacturing
companies and complexity
drivers along the value chain in
manufacturing companies
between 1991 and 2015

With regard to the existing literature, the data from
Fig. 5 were separated in two categories to allow the
researchers an overview about the different trends in the
literature regarding complexity drivers (Fig. 6) and their
increasing importance for manufacturing companies:
•
•

General complexity drivers in manufacturing companies (108 parts).
Complexity drivers along the value chain (115 parts).

Furthermore, the different trends in the literature show
the current research direction and give an implication for
gaps and future research.
Figure 6 shows these referred trends during the last
25 years. One hundred and eight literature parts (48%)
concern general complexity drivers in manufacturing
companies. Most of these publications were published
between the years 1998 and 2010 (70%). On the other side,

123

one hundred and ﬁfteen publications describe complexity
drivers along the value chain. Eighty-three percent of the
publications about complexity drivers along the value
chain were published in the last 10 years. Thus, there is an
increasing interest in complexity drivers along the value
chain in scientiﬁc literature.
Comparing the focus of publications in the early years
with the focus of publications during more recent years
shows that complexity drivers are now described more in
detail regarding different parts along the value chain. This
indicates that complexity drivers gain more and more
importance in scientiﬁc research.
¨
According to Wildemann [288], Schonsleben [234],
Blecker and Kersten [20] and Kaluza, Bliem and Winkler
[126], we separated the value chain in seven different
ﬁelds: product development (PD), procurement/purchasing
remanufacturing (R).
Furthermore, we extend this separation by introducing
the ﬁeld general in value chain (VC), because in our
research we found out that some authors described complexity drivers along the value chain in general.
To allow an overview about the trend of the literature in
the eight different ﬁelds of the value chain, the data from
Fig. 5 in the category complexity drivers along the value
chain were separated. Table 5 gives an overview about the
amount of literature across the last 25 years in particular
ﬁelds of the value chain. The table also shows that the
amount of publications about complexity drivers in all eight
different ﬁelds has increased. Thus, there is an increasing
interest in complexity drivers in the last 10 years.
The main focus is on internal supply chain (23%),
production (22%), logistics (16%), product development
(15%) and order processing/distribution (11%). Eightyseven percent of all publications are focused on these
ﬁelds. This shows that these ﬁelds are identiﬁed by several
researches as important sources of complexity in the
company and were analyzed precisely within the last
25 years. Other important sources of complexity are the
ﬁelds procurement, remanufacturing and general in value
chain, but only 13% of the publications are focused on
these ﬁelds. With a percentage of 3.5%, the ﬁeld remanufacturing has the smallest proportion of all publications.
The analysis shows that in the ﬁelds procurement, remanufacturing and general in value chain future research is
necessary, because these ﬁelds are also important sources
of complexity in manufacturing companies. Based on the
systems theory, complexity occurs not only in speciﬁc parts
of a system. Instead, handling complexity requires a consideration of all parts and their interdependencies in a
system.
3.2 Deﬁnition of complexity drivers
Complexity management in the company requires identiﬁcation and controlling of the essential complexity drivers
[44, 240], because ‘‘complexity drivers can yield in
increasing complexity’’ [19]. Before identiﬁcation, it is
necessary to understand what a complexity driver is
[144, 174]. Lucae, Rebentisch and Oelmen [162] argue that
it is important ‘‘to better understand the complexity drivers
that are impeding reliable planning and common planning
mistakes made in large-scale engineering programs’’. In
the literature today, there is no universal understanding of
the term ‘‘complexity driver’’ [174]. Buob [46] argues that
the term ‘‘complexity driver’’ cannot be deﬁned
extensively.
Answering the ﬁrst research question, we analyzed the
identiﬁed literature. Several different deﬁnitions exist in

Page 15 of 66

25

the literature, but they all tend to the same content and
seem alike and not different (Table 6).
To describe the term complexity driver, the ﬁrst step is
to understand what a driver is in general. In the Business
Dictionary [47], three different deﬁnitions of the term
‘‘driver’’ exist:
1.

2.
3.

Condition or decision that causes subsequent conditions or decisions to occur as a consequence of its own
occurrence.
Element of a system that has a major or critical effect
on the associated elements or the entire system.
Root cause of a condition or measurement.

These three different deﬁnitions show that a driver is
responsible for a situation or condition and has an impact
on it. Table 6 presents several deﬁnitions about complexity
drivers that exist in the literature and their authors. In total,
thirty-six literature sources describe different deﬁnitions
about complexity drivers. Twenty-six sources are written in
German and ten in English. Generally, the deﬁnitions can
be separated in ﬁve main categories: factors, indicators,
sources, parameters/variables and symptoms/phenomenon,
which inﬂuence a system’s complexity. The different
complexity driver’s categories are ﬁlled with information
from German- and English-written studies. Most of the
different driver’s categories comprise information from
both languages. Only the category ‘‘sources’’ are described
only in German-written literature studies. Further, it can be
seen that the English literature sources are concentrated on
the categories ‘‘factors’’ and ‘‘indicators‘‘. For literature’s
synthesizing, we analyzed the different statements or definitions of the authors and summarized them in a superior
statement, which is described in Table 6.
After analyzing and synthesizing the existing literature
and the described different deﬁnitions of complexity drivers, we come to the conclusion that an overall deﬁnition is
required to summarize all collected information in one
deﬁnition.
For the development of the new deﬁnition, we proceeded in the following way: In the ﬁrst step, we analyzed
the characteristic of a deﬁnition itself. The ﬁrst common
statement of a deﬁnition is by Aristoteles. He states that a
deﬁnition is a ‘‘statement, which contains the essence of the
object that is to be deﬁned’’ [66]. The Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics describes a deﬁnition as a
‘‘statement of the meaning of a word, term, or symbol’’
[42]. The encyclopedias of BROCKHAUS [35] and DIE
ZEIT [63] extend the mentioned deﬁnition and describe a
deﬁnition as a ‘‘determination of a term by specifying the
essential attributes’’ [35, 63]. According to the Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, a ‘‘traditional deﬁnition consists of a genus term and any of a number of
differentia. The genus term answers the question, ‘What


2005

1991

2

L

PR

1

1

2006

1

1992

2

2

1

2009

1

1

1

2

1

1

2010

1996

1

7

1

5

2

1

2011

1997

1

1

2

1

1

3

1

4

2012

1998

1

1

1

1

4

1

1

2013

1999

1

1

1

1

5

1

1

4

2014

2000

2001

1

2

1

3

1

2

2015

2002

115

6

4

26

13

25

18

6

17

Total (row)

1

1

2003

100

5.2

3.5

22.6

11.3

21.7

15.7

5.2

14.8

%

2

1

1

1

2004

Explanation to ﬁeld: PD product development, PC procurement/purchasing, L logistics, PR production, OPD order processing/distribution/sale, SC internal supply chain, R remanufacturing, VC
general in value chain

Total

2
1

1

2008

2

1995

2

2

1

1994

VC

SC

1

1

2

1

1

2007

1993

R

2

OPD

2

1

2

PC

PD

Field

Total

VC

R

SC

OPD

PR

L

PC

PD

Field

Table 5 Overview about the amount of literature in particular ﬁelds of the value chain between 1991 and 2015

25
Page 16 of 66

25

Table 6 Deﬁnitions of complexity drivers in scientiﬁc literature
Complexity driver’s
category

Author(s)

Deﬁnition The author(s) describe(s) complexity drivers as…

Factors

¨
Schmidt [227]1; Reiß [213]1; Fleck [79]1; Hoge [118]1;
Bohne [26]1; Puhl [204]1; Berens and Schmitting [14]1;
Fehling [76]1; Giannopoulos [87]2; Buob [46]1

…factors, which inﬂuence a system’s complexity

Piller and Waringer [202]1

…factors, which increase a system’s complexity

Hanenkamp [107]1; Meyer [174]1; Lammers [154]1

…factors, which inﬂuence the system’s complexity and are
responsible for changing system’s complexity level

Schuh, Gartzen and Wagner [244]2

…factors, which may create high complexity

Christ [52]

1

…factors, which are responsible for resource wasting
(‘Muda’) in the company

Warnecke and Puhl [276]1; Puhl [204]1; Perona and
Miragliotta [198]2; Giannopoulos [87]2; Leeuw,
Grotenhuis and Goor [158]2

…indicators, which inﬂuence a system’s complexity

Payne and Payne [196]2

…indicators for complexity, but they do not describe all
characteristics of the phenomenon

Rudzio, Apitz and Denkena [217]1

…indicators, which indicate high complexity in the company

Sources

Wildemann [284]1
Gießmann and Lasch [89]1

…sources, which are responsible for a system’s complexity
…sources, which inﬂuence the target achievement in the
company

Parameters/variables

Biersack [17]1

…parameters, indicators or factors, which help to deﬁne the
characteristics and economic effects of a system’s
complexity

Schließmann [224]1; Gerschberger et al. [86]2

…parameters, which are responsible for a system’s
complexity

Schwenk-Willi [252]1

…variables, which depend on one another, without complete
reduction to another one

Symptoms/
phenomenon

¨
Hoge [118]1

…symptoms of a system’s complexity

¨
Dehnen [59]1; Gotzfried [94]2

Others

Dehnen [59]1

…phenomenon, which actuate a system to increase own
complexity
…dimensions of complexity

Indicators

Moos [178]1

…forces, which encourage a system’s complexity and are
located on the interface between external and internal
complexity

Serdarasan [255, 256]2
Language of literature source:

1

German (number: 26);

…properties, which increase a system’s complexity
2

English (number: 10)

sort of thing is it?’. The differentia distinguish it from
members of related sets’’ [42]. The encyclopedias of DIE
ZEIT [63] describe the genus term as the ‘‘generic term
(genus proximum)’’. The differentia speciﬁes the differences in nature [63].
Based on deﬁnition’s structure in the literature, in the
next step, we analyzed the existing deﬁnitions and statements according to their structure. In all deﬁnitions or
statements, the term ‘‘complexity driver’’ is the genus term.
The terms ‘‘factor’’ or ‘‘indicator’’ or ‘‘source’’ or ‘‘parameter’’ etc. are the hypernym of a class. The differentia
describes the characteristic and the essential attributes of
the deﬁnition and ‘‘distinguish it from members of related
sets’’ [42]. The statements ‘‘[…] which inﬂuence a system’s
complexity’’ or ‘‘[…] which indicate high complexity in
company’’ etc. are the identiﬁed differentia in our research.

In the literature, several hypernyms for complexity
drivers are presented: factor, indicator, source, parameter, variable, symptom, phenomenon, dimension, force
and property. However, the meanings of these terms are
different (see Table 7). Thus, we analyzed these terms
and compared the meanings with the general understanding of a complexity driver, described in the literature. According to Schuh [240], Meyer [174] and
Krizianits [150], complexity drivers are causing something or have an effect or inﬂuence on something. Then,
we evaluated the existing meanings based on the following three evaluation criteria
Fulﬁlled
(??)

Content covers the general understanding
of a complexity driver in total and
contains the two terms cause and inﬂuence


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

Table 7 Deﬁnitions of complexity driver’s hypernyms
Complexity driver’s hypernyms

Deﬁnition according to the Oxford Learner’s Dictionary

Evaluation result

Factor [184]

‘‘One of several things that cause or inﬂuence something’’

??

Indicator [186]

‘‘A sign that shows you what something is like or how a situation is changing’’

–

Source [190]

‘‘A person or thing that causes something, especially a problem’’

?

Parameter [187]

‘‘Something that decides or limits the way in which something can be done’’

–

Variable [192]

‘‘Able to be changed’’

–

Symptom [191]

‘‘A sign that something exists, especially something bad’’

–

Phenomenon [188]

‘‘A fact or an event in nature or society, especially one that is not fully understood’’

–

Dimension [183]

‘‘The size and extent of a situation’’

–

Force [185]

‘‘The strong effect or inﬂuence of something’’

?

Property [189]

‘‘A quality or characteristic that something has’’

–

Explanation for evaluation criteria: ??, fulﬁlled; ?, partial fulﬁlled; –, not fulﬁlled

Partial
fulﬁlled (?)
Not fulﬁlled
(-)

Content covers the general understanding
of a complexity driver partial and contains
one of the two terms cause and inﬂuence
Content covers not the general
understanding of a complexity. The two
terms cause and inﬂuence are not
described

The terms, which fulﬁll the general understanding of a
complexity driver, are marked (see Table 7). The Oxford
Learner’s Dictionary deﬁnes the different hypernyms presented in Table 7. As a result, only the term factor consists
the attributes cause and inﬂuence. Thus, we come to the
conclusion that the term factor is the suitable hypernym for
complexity drivers.
In the next step, we analyzed the identiﬁed differentia
and compared them with each other to identify differences
and communalities. Then, we clustered the differentia
according to their content. In the literature, sixteen different differentiae are described. Some differentiae are used
more often than others to describe complexity drivers.
Table 8 presents the sixteen differentiae, their literature’s
occurrence and the results of differentia’s clustering.
In summary, the sixteen differentiae can be clustered in
ﬁve groups. The ﬁrst group describes that complexity drivers have principally an inﬂuence on system’s complexity.
Group #2 concretizes the statement of group #1 and concludes that complexity drivers have not only an inﬂuence
on system’s complexity, but they are responsible for
increasing the complexity level in a system. Group #3
describes further that complexity drivers have a direct
inﬂuence on company’s target achievement. Beyond,
complexity drivers are inﬂuenced by one another, that is by
internal or external drivers, and cannot be reduced completely to another one (see Group #4). Furthermore, complexity drivers help to deﬁne the characteristics or the
phenomenon of a system’s complexity (see Group #5).

123

Based on the ﬁve differentia groups and the identiﬁed
hypernym term ‘‘factor’’, we developed the following
general complexity driver deﬁnition:
Complexity drivers are factors, which inﬂuence a
system’s complexity and company’s target achievement. They are responsible for increasing system’s
complexity level and help to deﬁne the characteristics
or the phenomenon of a system’s complexity. Complexity drivers are inﬂuenced by one another, that is
by internal or external drivers, and cannot be
reduced completely to another one.
3.3 Approaches for identiﬁcation,
operationalization and visualization
of complexity drivers
Complexity drivers have inﬂuence on companies and the
total value chain [240]. A speciﬁc and target-oriented
complexity management is based on identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization of a system’s complexity
drivers. Keuper [132] describes that handling a company’s
complexity depends on the complexity drivers. Schmitt,
¨
Vorspel-Ruter and Wienholdt [230] explain that the identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of measureable complexity
drivers are the baseline for complexity reduction. Further
Schwenk-Willi [252] and Sun and Rose [266] argue that
complexity drivers are necessary for operationalization and
quantiﬁcation of complexity. Greitemeyer, Meier and
Ulrich [96] describe that complexity drivers are responsible
for complexity costs. Moreover, they are necessary for the
creation of complexity key performance indicators.
Therefore, it is required to identify and evaluate the relevant drivers [96].
According to the quote ‘‘If you can’t measure it you

25

Table 8 Overview of complexity driver’s differentia and their literature’s occurrence
Type

In the literature described complexity driver’s
differentia

Number of authors that
use this differentia

Clustering of the identiﬁed complexity driver’s differentia

#1

[…], which inﬂuence a system’s complexity

18

[…], which inﬂuence a system’s complexity

#2

[…], which are responsible for a system’s
complexity

3

#3
#4

[…], which encourage a system’s complexity
[…], symptoms of a system’s complexity

1
1

#5

[…], dimension of complexity

1

#6

[…], are responsible for changing system’s
complexity level

3

#7

[…], which increase a system’s complexity

3

#8

[…], which may create high complexity

1

#9

[…], which indicate high complexity in the
company

1

#10

[…], which actuate a system to increase own
complexity

2

#11

[…], which are responsible for resource wasting
in the company

1

#12

[…], which inﬂuence the target achievement in
the company

1

#13

[…], which depend on one another, without
complete reduction to another one

1

#14

[…], located on the interface between external
and internal complexity

1

#15

[…], but they do not describe all characteristics of
the phenomenon

1

#16

[…], which help to deﬁne the characteristic and
economic effects of a system’s complexity

1

holistic view [266]. For quantifying complexity drivers and
their effects, it is necessary to identify theoretically possible complexity drivers ﬁrst. The next step is to identify
practically relevant complexity drivers [109, 264], for
example within an empirical research [289].
To answer the second research question, we analyzed
the identiﬁed literature sources according to general
approaches for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization. Parry, Purchase and Mills
[194] argue that recognition and identiﬁcation of the
complexity drivers ‘‘enable managers to realize value’’ and
‘‘reducing complexity where possible‘‘. Ehrenmann [67]
argues further that complexity driver’s analysis enables
ﬁrst indications about the success of process’s changing.
3.3.1 Identiﬁcation of complexity drivers
As a result of literature analysis, thirty-seven authors
describe in their papers twenty-one different approaches
for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation. Most of the identiﬁed approaches are published in German-written studies
(68%). More than 50% of the approaches are applied for

[…], which are responsible for increasing system’s
complexity level

[…], which inﬂuence company’s target achievement

[…], are inﬂuenced by one another (internal or external)
and cannot be reduced completely to another one

[…], help to deﬁne the characteristics or the phenomenon
of a system’s complexity

complexity driver’s identiﬁcation general in manufacturing
companies. Based on the literature analysis, the most
applied approaches are expert interviews, process analysis
and system analysis. Table 9 presents an overview of the
identiﬁed approaches found in the literature and the ﬁelds
on which they are focused. Some authors combine different
approaches to identify complexity drivers. Furthermore,
the identiﬁed approaches are clustered into seven ﬁelds,
based on their principle to increase transparency. An
evaluation of the different approaches regarding their
practical uses wasn’t conducted. This is a mere reﬂection
of the approaches found in the literature. Such an evaluation can be an implication for further research.
According to Table 9, fourteen different authors use
approaches based on questioning for identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of complexity drivers. These approaches are
applied to gather the expert’s knowledge and experience.
Further methods for identiﬁcation of complexity drivers are
the process or situation observation, the process analysis and
the activity-based costing. They are used by eleven different
authors. During a process analysis, the process is divided
into its parts to increase process’s understanding and to

Schiffers
[271]1
Warnecke and
Puhl [276]1
Rosemann
[216]1
Puhl [204]1
Meier and
Hanenkamp
[171]1
Hanenkamp
[107]1
Giannopoulos
[87]2
¨
¨
Großler, Grubner
and Milling
[101]2
Kohagen [143]1
Krause, Franke
and
Gausemeier
[149]1
Greitemeyer,
Meier and
Ulrich [96]1
Lasch and
Gießmann
[156]1
Bayer [11]1
Schließmann
[224]1

Author(s)

•

•

•

•

Process
analysis

Questionnaire

Expert
interviews

Workshops

2

1
Process
observation

•

Activitybased
costing

Situation
observation

•

•

•

System
analysis

3
Structure
analysis

G

G

G

G

G
G

G

G

G
G

G

G

•

Failure
mode
and
effect
analysis

•

•

Dependence
analysis

G
G

•

Cause–
effect
analysis
(Ishikawa)

•

Inﬂuence
analysis

4
Variant
mode
and
effect
analysis

Table 9 Overview about approaches for identiﬁcation of complexity drivers in particular ﬁelds
Focus

Page 20 of 66

Approach(es) based on…
(1) Questioning, (2) process and observation, (3) system, (4) inﬂuence and dependency, (5) documents and literature, (6) classiﬁcation and (7) others

25
and Wienholdt
[230]1
Schawel and
Billing [222]1
Collinson and
Jay [54]2
Steinhilper et al.
[264]1
Serdarasan
[256]2
Krumm and
Schopf [151]1
Bosch-Rekveldt
et al. [28]2
Wildemann
[283]1
Weber [278]1
Lasch and
Gießmann
[155]1
Kersten,
Lammers and
Skride [130]1
Reuter, Prote and
¨
Stower [214]1
Schott,
Horstmann and
Bodendorf
[235]2
Perona and
Miragliotta
[198]2
Geimer [84]1

Author(s)

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

2
Process
analysis

Questionnaire

Expert
interviews

Workshops

1
Process
observation

Activitybased
costing

•

Situation
observation

•

•

•

•

System
analysis

3

•

Structure
analysis

Inﬂuence
analysis

4
Cause–
effect
analysis
(Ishikawa)
Dependence
analysis

Failure
mode
and
effect
analysis

(1) Questioning, (2) process and observation, (3) system, (4) inﬂuence and dependency, (5) documents and literature, (6) classiﬁcation and (7) others

Approach(es) based on…

Table 9 continued

•

Variant
mode
and
effect
analysis

SC

SC

PR

PR

L

L
L

PC

PD

PD

G

G

G

G

G

Focus

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 21 of 66
25


•
1

Activitybased
costing

1

Situation
observation

3

1

Structure
analysis

4

2

Inﬂuence
analysis

1

Cause–
effect
analysis
(Ishikawa)

1

Dependence
analysis

1

Failure
mode
and
effect
analysis

1

SC
SC
SC

SC

1

ABC
analysis

Literature
research

Analyzing of
documents

Complexity
diaries

6

5

•

Factor
analysis

7

•

cost–beneﬁt
analysis

Creativity
techniques

Approach(es) based on…
(1) Questioning, (2) process and observation, (3) system, (4) inﬂuence and dependency, (5) documents and literature, (6) classiﬁcation and
(7) others

9

10

3

•

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G

Focus

VC

VC

•

•

R

•

R

•

8

•

System
analysis

•

•

•

Process
observation

•

•

•

2
Process
analysis

Questionnaire

Expert
interviews

Workshops

1

(1) Questioning, (2) process and observation, (3) system, (4) inﬂuence and dependency, (5) documents and literature, (6) classiﬁcation and (7) others

Vizjak and Schiffers [271]1
Warnecke and Puhl [276]1
Rosemann [216]1
Puhl [204]1
Meier and Hanenkamp [171]1
Hanenkamp [107]1
Giannopoulos [87]2
¨
¨
Großler, Grubner and Milling [101]2
Kohagen [143]1
Krause, Franke and Gausemeier [149]1
Greitemeyer, Meier and Ulrich [96]1

Author(s)

Vickers and
Kodarin [270]2
Ballmer [10]1
Kersten [127]1
Leeuw,
Grotenhius and
Goor [158]2
Haumann et al.
[109]2
Seifert et al.
[254]2
Brosch et al.
[37]1
Brosch et al.
[40]2
R

Author(s)

Variant
mode
and
effect
analysis

Table 9 continued
Focus

Page 22 of 66

Approach(es) based on…

25
1

•

3

•
•
•

1

•

ABC
analysis

Literature
research

Analyzing of
documents

Complexity
diaries

6

5

2

•

Factor
analysis

7

1

cost–beneﬁt
analysis

1

•

Creativity
techniques

Approach(es) based on…
(1) Questioning, (2) process and observation, (3) system, (4) inﬂuence and dependency, (5) documents and literature, (6) classiﬁcation and
(7) others

G
G
G
G
PD
PD
PC
L
L
L
PR
PR
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
SC
R
R
VC
VC

G
G
G
G

Focus

Language of literature source:

1

German (number: 25);

2

English (number: 12)

Explanation according to focus: G general in manufacturing companies, PD product development, PC procurement/purchasing, L logistics, PR production*, OPD order processing/distribution/
sale*, SC internal supply chain, R remanufacturing, VC total value chain (* no approaches for identiﬁcation of complexity drivers were found in this ﬁeld)

Lasch and Gießmann [156]1
Bayer [11]1
Schließmann [224]1
¨
Schmitt, Vorspel-Ruter and Wienholdt
[230]1
Schawel and Billing [222]1
Collinson and Jay [54]2
Steinhilper et al. [264]1
Serdarasan [256]2
Krumm and Schopf [151]1
Bosch-Rekveldt et al. [28]2
Wildemann [283]1
Weber [278]1
Lasch and Gießmann [155]1
Kersten, Lammers and Skride [130]1
¨
Reuter, Prote and Stower [214]1
Schott, Horstmann and Bodendorf [235]2
Perona and Miragliotta [198]2
Geimer [84]1
Vickers and Kodarin [270]2
Ballmer [10]1
Kersten [127]1
Leeuw, Grotenhius and Goor [158]2
Haumann et al. [109]2
Seifert et al. [254]2
Brosch et al. [37]1
Brosch et al. [40]2
R

Author(s)

Table 9 continued

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 23 of 66
25


identify the main parts as well as possible weaknesses. Activity-based costing is based on the process analysis. The
costs are divided into direct and indirect costs to identify cost
drivers and thus complexity drivers. Another possibility to
identify complexity drivers is to analyze a company’s system
or structure. During a system analysis, the system is divided
into its parts with the objective of identiﬁcation and analyzing system’s behavior and the interdependency between
the different parts [149]. The structure analysis is conducted
in the same way as a system or a process analysis. To analyze
the interdependency between the elements of processes,
systems, parts or structures and to identify furthermore the
speciﬁc complexity drivers, the following approaches are
used in the literature: inﬂuence analysis, dependence analysis, cause–effect analysis, variant mode and effect analysis
and failure mode and effect analysis. These approaches are
based on a process, system or structure analysis. A further
feasibility to get an overview about a company’s complexity
and their drivers is to analyze the scientiﬁc literature or the
existing documents in the company as well as complexity
diaries. Complexity diaries are used by the management and
employees to document all causes of complexity in the
company [54]. In the existing literature, four authors use
these approaches for identifying complexity drivers. ABC
analysis is also applied for identiﬁcation of complexity drivers. Wildemann [283] uses ABC analysis in combination
with a system analysis in the ﬁeld procurement and logistics.
As a result of this analysis, the goods or components, which
occur at any rate, but have the highest complexity in the
system, are the complexity drivers. Other approaches for
identiﬁcation of complexity drivers are the factor analysis,
the cost–beneﬁt analysis and creativity techniques. The
factor analysis is a multivariate statistical method used to
describe variability based on an empirical research. The
objective is to concentrate the high number of variables to a
lower number, called factors. These factors are the main
determining components in a system [41] and thus the
complexity drivers. In the literature, the cost–beneﬁt analysis
is also used to identify complexity drivers according to a
company’s performance. As a result of a cost–beneﬁt analysis, the objects with the highest costs and lowest beneﬁt can
be identiﬁed as the complexity drivers [271]. The creativity
techniques in combination with other approaches are also
used for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, but no speciﬁc
creativity method is referred to in the literature.
3.3.2 Operationalization and visualization of complexity
drivers
After identiﬁcation of complexity drivers, the next step for
a target-oriented complexity management is to operationalize and visualize the complexity drivers. Based on the
literature analysis, seventeen authors and eight different

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

approaches were identiﬁed for operationalization of complexity drivers. For visualization of complexity drivers,
nineteen authors and eight approaches were found. The
most applied approach in both areas is the classiﬁcation
and driver matrixes. Table 10 presents an overview of the
identiﬁed approaches and the ﬁelds. Some authors combine
different approaches to operationalize complexity drivers.
The identiﬁed approaches for operationalization and
visualization were also clustered into seven ﬁelds based on
their principle to increase transparency and understanding.
Again, this is just a mere reﬂection of the approaches found
in the literature without an evaluation of their application
in practice. However, it can be seen that some approaches,
like the classiﬁcation and driver matrixes and the cluster
analysis, are used for both visualization and operationalization. Further research may include the evaluation of the
application of different approaches in practice and their
precise ﬁelds of application. Because some approaches are
used for both visualization and operationalization, it is not
clear how these approaches are used and clariﬁcation
through further research is needed.
The most applied approach in scientiﬁc literature for
operationalization and visualization of complexity drivers
is the classiﬁcation or driver matrix. Here, the complexity
drivers are grouped and evaluated according to their
inﬂuences, dependencies and effects. Based on the evaluation results, complexity drivers can be visualized in a
portfolio diagram to identify critical complexity drivers.
To identify and operationalize the inﬂuences, dependencies and effects of complexity drivers, some authors use
an inﬂuence or system analysis. Based on an inﬂuence or
system analysis, further methods for visualization of
complexity drivers in the ﬁeld of classiﬁcation are the
complexity vector and the cause–effect diagram, named
Ishikawa diagram. Compared to Ishikawa, the complexity
vector is more complex and difﬁcult. Generating complexity vectors, Kersten, Lammers and Skride [130] classify complexity drivers in the two dimensions micro and
macro, based on their system’s inﬂuence and the results of
a cluster analysis. In this case, the cluster analysis is
applied to operationalize and classify the complexity drivers in related groups to increase transparency. Further
methods for operationalization of complexity drivers are
expert interviews, factor analysis, scoring methods and
portfolio methods.
Based on a system’s structure, three different approaches for visualization of complexity drivers are applied:
descriptive model, variant tree and swimlane diagram. The
descriptive model is used to describe a system’s complexity, whereby the drivers can be visualized. With variant
trees and swimlane diagrams, the complexity drivers can be
11

Brosch et al. [38]1

R

1

•

Kersten [127]1
4

3

•

Kersten, Lammers and Skride
[130]1

4

•

Lasch and Gießmann [155]1
•

•

Seifert et al. [254]2
Wildemann and Voigt [289]1

VC

SC

L

L

G, R
G

G

G

G, R

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G

G, R

1

G
G

•

1

•

Portfolio
methods

Aelker, Bauernhansl and Ehm
[3]2

1

•

Factor
analysis

7

•

•

•

•

Scoring
methods

6

Steinhilper et al. [264]1

•

•

System
analysis

4

•

Haumann et al. [109]

•

Expert
interviews

3

Focus

Lammers [154]1

•

Schuh et al. [245]1

1

None approach referred

Schuh et al. [238]1

Krizanits [150]1

None approach referred

Schawel and Billing [222]1

•

•

•

Lasch and Gießmann [156]1

•
•

None approach referred

•

•

Inﬂuence
analysis

Classiﬁcation/driver
matrix

Cluster
analysis

2

1

Approaches for operationalization

Approach(es) based on…
(1) Classiﬁcation, (2) inﬂuence and dependency, (3) questioning, (4) system, (5) structure, (6) evaluation and (7) others

Meyer [174]1
¨
Dalhofer [58]1

Purle [205]1
¨
¨
Großler, Grubner and Milling
[101]2
¨
Schuh, Sauer and Doring [241]1

Puhl [204]1

Stark and Oman [261]2

Author(s)

Table 10 Overview of approaches for operationalization and visualization of complexity drivers in particular ﬁelds

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 25 of 66
25

•

•

•

1

•

•

2

1

3

3

1

2

VC

SC

L

L

G

G, R

G

G, R

G, R
G

G

G

G

G

G

Language of literature source:

1

German (number: 18);

2

English (number: 4)

Explanation according to focus: G general in manufacturing companies, PD product development*, PC procurement/purchasing*, L logistics, PR production*, OPD order processing/
distribution/sale*, SC internal supply chain, R remanufacturing, VC value chain (* no approaches for operationalization or visualization of complexity drivers were found in this ﬁeld)

1

6

•

•

R

•

Kersten, Lammers and Skride
[130]1
Kersten [127]1

•

•

Brosch et al. [38]1

Lasch and Gießmann [155]1

Wildemann and Voigt [289]1

Seifert et al. [254]2

Aelker, Bauernhansl and Ehm
[3]2

Steinhilper et al. [264]1

Haumann et al. [109]
Lammers [154]1

1

•

•

G

None approach referred

Schuh et al. [245]1

Krizanits [150]1

•

G

•

Schuh et al. [238]1

Schawel and Billing [222]1

Lasch and Gießmann [156]

Meyer [174]1
¨
Dalhofer [58]1

G
G

G

None approach referred

•

G
G

None approach referred

•

Radar
chart

Purle [205]1
¨
¨
Großler, Grubner and Milling
[101]2
¨
Schuh, Sauer and Doring
[241]1
•

Descriptive
model

•

Variant
tree/complexity tree

5

Puhl [204]1

Stark and Oman [261]2

Cause–effect
diagram

Cluster
analysis

Classiﬁcation/driver
matrix

Complexity
vector

2

1

Approaches for visualization

Swimlane
diagram

Author(s)

6

Table 10 continued
Focus

Page 26 of 66

Approach(es) based on…
(1) Classiﬁcation, (2) inﬂuence and dependency, (3) questioning, (4) system, (5) structure, (6) evaluation and (7) others

25
3.4 Complexity drivers in manufacturing companies
and along the value chain
As already mentioned, complexity drivers have inﬂuence
on companies and the total value chain [240]. According to
the origin, complexity can be separated in internal and
external parts [21, 129, 292], called internal and external
complexity drivers. Internal and external complexity drivers are connected directly and induce system’s complexity
[12, 54, 94, 97, 101]. Consequently, internal and external
complexity drivers cannot be separated selectively and
operationalized [26, 94, 227, 239].
Bliss [22, 23] follows the categorization of internal and
external complexity drivers in principle, but he extends the
idea and differentiates internal complexity drivers in correlated and autonomous complexity drivers. Correlated
complexity drivers have a direct correlation to the external
market’s complexity and are inﬂuenced by it. Autonomous
complexity drivers are not inﬂuenced by external factors.
They are determined by the company itself. In the literature, ﬁfteen authors apply the differentiation of Bliss in
their publications (Appendix Table 14). Furthermore,
¨
Curran, Elliger and Rudiger [57] conclude that it is
required to separate the complexity drivers in value-adding
and non-value-adding drivers. Mahmood, Rosdi and
Muhamed [165] argue that ‘‘in measuring cost of complexity, the decision is to ﬁnd the complexity driver that
invested more cost but does not contribute much to customer’s buying decision’’.
3.4.1 Internal complexity drivers
Internal complexity drivers describe the company’s complexity and can be inﬂuenced actively by the company
itself [3, 18, 23, 29, 127–129, 200, 205, 282]. They occur
as a result of external complexity drivers or are induced by
the company itself [54, 95, 107, 111, 154, 217, 279].
¨
Gotzfried [94] argues that internal complexity is a translation of external complexity, which is induced exclusively
by the company. Wildemann [281] separates internal
complexity drivers in three categories: structural, informational and individual complexity drivers.
3.4.2 External complexity drivers
External complexity drivers are factors, which inﬂuence
the company’s complexity directly from outside
[3, 18, 54, 90, 111, 118, 127–129, 140, 201, 205, 281, 282].
Bohne [26] and Klepsch [140] describe that external

Page 27 of 66

25

complexity produces internal complexity as a reaction.
Piller [201] deﬁnes external complexity as a ‘‘mirror picture’’ of the market’s requirements. Normally, external
complexity drivers are constant and cannot or nearly cannot be inﬂuenced by the company itself because they are
not induced by the company [17, 18, 29, 90, 94, 127,
129, 154, 200, 279].
To handle external complexity, companies typically
respond with an unwanted increase in internal and
accordingly non-value-adding complexity [12, 54, 59, 95,
¨
¨
96, 201, 284]. Großler, Grubner and Milling [101] argue
that external complexity drivers force the company to build
up internal complexity.
3.4.3 Complexity driver’s classiﬁcation system
Managing complexity in companies requires the identiﬁcation of complexity sources. Lasch and Gießmann [155]
describe that the complexity sources and their effects are
various. Thus, a complete list of all sources cannot be
speciﬁed. In the literature, more than 480 different complexity drivers were found during our research in 223 literature parts concerning complexity drivers in
manufacturing companies and along the value chain. For a
¨
better understanding and overview, Schottl, Herrmann,
Maurer and Lindemann [236] suggest that complexity
drivers ‘‘have to be aggregated to a small, abstract and
well-deﬁned collection’’. To increase transparency, Klagge
and Blank [137], Wildemann [282], Lasch and Gießmann
[155, 156] and Gießmann [88] follow this approach and
also separate their identiﬁed complexity drivers in different
clusters according to their origin, characteristic and inﬂuences on other drivers. The framework for the classiﬁcation
system used in this paper is based upon existing classiﬁcation systems in the literature provided by different
authors. To create a superior classiﬁcation system without
overlaps between the different complexity driver categories, we analyzed and synthesized the existing systems as
follows:
In their research, Bliss [22, 23], Kirchhof [134],
Hasenpusch, Moos and Schwellbach [108], Keuper [132],
Marti [168], Mayer [170], Lasch and Gießmann [155],
¨
Gießmann [88], Gießmann and Lasch [90], Schomann
¨
[232], Gotzfried [94], Schoeneberg [233], Grimm, Schuller
and Wilhelmer [97] and Lammers [154] cluster complexity
drivers according to their origin into external and internal
drivers. Furthermore, they separate the internal drivers into
internal correlated and internal autonomous complexity
drivers. Schubert [237] argues that external complexity
comprises complexity drivers from a market-based view
and internal complexity comprises drivers from a resourcebased view.


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

Society complexity
External
complexity

Market complexity
General
market-related
complexity

Demand
complexity

Competitive
complexity

Supply
complexity

Technological
complexity
(external)

Internal correlated complexity
Target
complexity

Customer
complexity

Product &
product portfolio
complexity

Technological
complexity
(internal)

Product development
complexity

Supply process
complexity

Service
complexity

Remanufacturing
complexity

Internal
complexity

Internal autonoums complexity
Organizational
complexity

Process
complexity

Production
complexity

Resource
complexity

Logistics
complexity

Planning, control &
information
complexity

Sales & distribution
complexity

General
complexity
Fig. 7 Complexity driver’s classiﬁcation system

In our study, we followed the already mentioned classiﬁcation and divide our classiﬁcation system into the two
main categories: internal and external complexity drivers.
Further, we also divided the internal complexity drivers
into internal correlated and internal autonomous complexity drivers (see Fig. 7).
In the literature, Keuper [132], Marti [168], Lasch and
Gießmann [155], Gießmann [88], Gießmann and Lasch
[90], Schoeneberg [233], Grimm, Schuller and Wilhelmer
[97] and Ruppert [218] subdivide external complexity into
society complexity and market complexity. Society complexity is determined by cultural factors (language, working
hours, habit, working method, education), ecological factors, legal factors, standards and regulations and political
factors. The list with all identiﬁed complexity drivers in
this and all other categories, which will be mentioned, is
shown in ‘‘Appendix’’ (see Table 15). Asan [6] and Serdarasan [255] use the term geopolitical complexity synonymously for society complexity. However, in the
literature most of the authors use the term society complexity, which is the reason why we followed this
nomenclature. In the literature, market complexity is further
subdivided into different subcategories. Keuper [132],
Lasch and Gießmann [155], Gießmann [88], Gießmann and

123

Lasch [90], Schoeneberg [233], Grimm, Schuller and
Wilhelmer [97] assign the subcategories demand complexity, competitive complexity and supply complexity to
¨
this subcategory. Bliss [22, 23], Marti [168], Schomann
[232] and Blockus [24] follow this assignment and extend
the subcategory by adding technological complexity (external). In the literature, we found several single marketrelated complexity drivers, which cannot be assigned to the
previously mentioned categories. Thus, we introduced a
new category called general market-related complexity.
As already mentioned, in our research, we divided the
main category internal complexity into the subcategories
internal correlated and internal autonomous complexity.
Bliss [23], Lasch and Gießmann [155], Gießmann [88],
¨
Gießmann and Lasch [90], Schomann [232] and Marti
[168] assign the following complexity driver categories to
the subcategory internal correlated complexity: target
complexity, customer complexity as well as product and
product portfolio complexity. Keuper [132], Schoeneberg
[233] and Grimm, Schuller and Wilhelmer [97] follow this
assignment and extend the subcategory by adding technological complexity (internal). Other authors have added
further complexity driver categories to the subcategory
became independent categories within the subcategory
internal correlated complexity. Bayer [11], Dehnen [59],
Kim and Wilemon [133] and Wildemann and Voigt [289]
add the category product development complexity, and
Bayer [11], Blockus [24] and Nurcahya [179] add the
category supply process complexity to the mentioned subcategory. The subcategory internal correlated complexity is
completed by adding the categories service complexity and
remanufacturing complexity. Service complexity is added
¨
by Schmidt [228], Collinson and Jay [54] and Dalhofer
[58]. Remanufacturing complexity is added by Bayer [11],
Haumann et al. [109], Steinhilper et al. [264], Seifert et al.
[254] and Butzer et al. [48]. In summary, the subcategory
internal correlated complexity comprises eight complexity
driver categories: target complexity, customer complexity,
product and product portfolio complexity, technological
complexity (internal), product development complexity,
supply process complexity, service complexity and
remanufacturing complexity.
In the next step, the subcategory internal autonomous
complexity is deﬁned. Lasch and Gießmann [155],
Gießmann [88], Gießmann and Lasch [90], Schoeneberg
¨
[233], Grimm, Schuller and Wilhelmer [97] and Schomann
[232] assign the categories organizational complexity and
process complexity to the subcategory internal autonomous
complexity. Lasch and Gießmann [155], Gießmann [88],
Gießmann and Lasch [90] and Schoeneberg [233] extend
the subcategory by the category structure complexity.
However, several authors such as Asan [6], Serdarasan
[255], Reiß [213], Blockus [24], Wildemann and Voigt
¨
[289], Hoge [118], Blecker, Kersten and Meyer [21],
Kersten et al. [129], Schubert [237], Collinson and Jay
¨
[54], Schuh, Gartzen and Wagner [244], Gotzfried [94],
Ruppert [218], Schulte [249], Lindemann, Maurer and
¨
¨
Braun [160] and Großler, Grubner and Milling [101]
include structural complexity drivers in the category
organizational complexity. To avoid overlaps in our classiﬁcation system, we also assigned structural complexity
drivers to the category organizational complexity. Other
important categories, which are added to the subcategory
internal autonomous complexity, are the production complexity and planning, control and information complexity.
In the literature, production complexity is deﬁned by Bliss
[22, 23], Bayer [11], Mayer [170], Keuper [132],
Gießmann and Lasch [90], Lasch and Gießmann [155],
¨
Schomann [232], Blockus [24], Marti [168], Klepsch [140],
Pepels [197], Ruppert [218], Gronau and Lindemann [98],
¨
¨
Westphal [280], Jager et al. [123], Gotzfried [94], Schulte
[248] and Schmidt [228]. The category planning, control
and information complexity is deﬁned by Keuper [132],
Mayer [170], Gießmann and Lasch [90], Lasch and
¨
Gießmann [155], Schomann [232], Schoeneberg [233],

Page 29 of 66

25

¨
Ruppert [218], Klagge and Blank [137], Jager et al. [123],
Gullander et al. [105], Grimm, Schuller and Wilhelmer
[97] and Hermann [115]. Furthermore, the categories re¨
source complexity, deﬁned by Hoge [118], Reiners and
Sasse [210] Bohne [26], logistics complexity, deﬁned by
Klagge and Blank [137], and sales and distribution complexity, deﬁned by Bayer [11] and Klepsch [140], are added
to the subcategory internal autonomous complexity. In
total, the subcategory internal autonomous complexity
comprises seven complexity driver categories: organizational complexity, process complexity, production complexity, planning, control and information complexity,
resource complexity, logistics complexity and sales and
distribution complexity.
As already mentioned, complexity drivers are separated
according to their origin into external and internal complexity drivers. In the literature, a further superior classiﬁcation system exists. Denk and Pfneissl [62] separate the
complexity drivers in two main groups: general complexity
drivers (e.g., transparency, uncertainty) and precise complexity drivers (e.g., organizational complexity, process
complexity, technological complexity). General complexity drivers are also referred to by Mayer [170], Reiß
[212, 213], Berens and Schmitting [14], Hermann [115],
Gronau and Lindemann [98], Kolbusa [144, 145], Schmitt,
¨
Vorspel-Ruter and Wienholdt [230], Kersten et al. [129],
Blecker, Kersten and Meyer [21], Bick and Drexl-Wittbecker [16] and Waldthausen [273]. Thus, we included a
third main complexity category called general complexity
in our classiﬁcation system. The total classiﬁcation system
is shown in Fig. 7.
After deﬁning the superior complexity driver classiﬁcation system, we assigned the complexity drivers found in
the literature to these previously deﬁned main groups and
categories. According to the literature, we clustered the
identiﬁed complexity drivers (more than 480) into:
•
•

•

three main groups (external complexity, internal complexity and general complexity)
four subcategories (society complexity, market complexity, internal correlated complexity and internal
autonomous complexity) and
twenty-two main complexity driver categories (society,
demand, competitive, supply, technological external,
target, customer, product and product portfolio, technological internal, product development, supply process, service, remanufacturing, organizational, process,
production, planning, control and information, resource, logistics, sales and distribution, and general
complexity) depending on their origin, characteristic
and inﬂuences on other drivers. The subcategory
society complexity and the main group general complexity are also added to the twenty-two main


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

Fig. 8 Overview about complexity driver’s clustering and their occurrence in the literature

complexity driver categories, because they cannot be
further subdivided into different driver categories.
Thus, we added the identiﬁed single complexity drivers
directly to these two categories.
For complexity driver’s clustering, we analyzed all
identiﬁed drivers and summarized them according to their
context and similarities in a superior complexity driver
category. As already mentioned, this framework is based
on the literature. For example, in the category ‘‘Society
complexity’’, we identiﬁed the following seven single
complexity drivers and aggregated them to the mentioned
superior category: social framework, social requirements,
social change, social behavior, cultural framework, cultural
factors (language, working hours, habit, working method,
education) and cultural differences. In the category
‘‘Technological complexity (external)‘‘, we identiﬁed the
following nine single complexity drivers, which were also
aggregated to the mentioned superior category: technological progress, technological change, different technological standards, technological innovations, technological
intensity, technological dynamics, new technologies and
materials, combination of different technologies and technology integration. In the main group ‘‘general complexity’’, we aggregated all complexity drivers, which cannot
be assigned to the other two main groups and four subcategories. In the main group ‘‘general complexity’’, we
assigned twenty-eight single complexity drivers such as

123

stability, instability, perception, time, costs, quality, ﬂexibility, cost effectiveness and transparency. For the other
complexity driver categories, we performed the clustering
process analogously. Figure 8 presents the clustered
twenty-two main complexity driver categories and their
occurrence in the literature in all ﬁelds (general in manufacturing companies and along the value chain). Table 15
in ‘‘Appendix’’ shows the different complexity drivers in
each category and group.
To answer the third research question, we separated the
data from Fig. 8 into the different ﬁelds general in manufacturing companies and along the value chain. As a result
of Table 11, some ﬁelds are inﬂuenced by more complexity
drivers than other ﬁelds. The amount of complexity drivers
in a system reﬂects the level of difﬁculty in managing a
system’s complexity, because complexity drivers have a
high inﬂuence on a system’s complexity. Complexity drivers are strictly connected with their category. For a targetoriented complexity management, it is necessary to handle
all complexity drivers in a certain category of a speciﬁc
system. In an overall view, it can be summarized that
system’s complexity is inﬂuenced by the complexity driver
categories. For example, the ﬁeld production is inﬂuenced
by ﬁfteen complexity driver categories, while remanufacturing is inﬂuenced by seven complexity driver categories.
Thus, the implementation of a target-oriented complexity
information complexity

General complexity

Inﬂuenced by … complexity driver categories

486

28

40

39

Production complexity

Sales and Distribution
complexity

25

Process complexity

9

105

Organizational complexity

17

2

Remanufacturing complexity

Logistics complexity

3

Service complexity

Resource complexity

7

Supply process complexity

15

Technological complexity
(internal)
8

43

Product and product portfolio
complexity

Product development
complexity

10

7

9

Customer complexity

Target complexity

Total amount of complexity driver’s literature
occurrence

General

Internal
autonomous
complexity

Internal
correlated
complexity

Technological complexity
(external)

19

9

Supply complexity

7

Competitive complexity

General market-related
complexity

Demand complexity

25
18

Society complexity

External
complexity

Number of
speciﬁc
complexity
drivers

Complexity driver
category [N: 22]

Origin

22

824

48

18

2

8

38

39

39

142

5

4

3

8

15

133

50

12

26

31

35

59

53

56

General in
manufacturing
companies

RQ3: Fields

18

94

1

3

1

1

4

4

7

17

0

0

0

4

7

18

1

3

4

0

5

3

5

6

Product
development

Value chain

15

36

4

0

1

0

0

2

3

7

0

1

1

0

1

6

1

1

0

3

0

2

2

1

Procurement/
purchasing

19

147

2

3

5

1

10

8

7

22

0

0

1

0

4

21

7

4

3

9

6

12

10

12

Logistics

19

140

8

1

5

1

6

19

14

27

0

0

1

4

2

26

2

0

1

4

2

6

5

6

Production

Table 11 Overview of the main complexity drivers in particular ﬁelds and complexity driver’s literature occurrence

20

124

0

9

3

1

7

3

6

32

0

1

1

1

1

14

8

1

2

4

6

7

7

10

Order
processing/
distribution/
sale

18

168

7

4

9

1

7

11

9

29

0

0

2

0

2

27

8

0

3

11

5

15

9

9

Internal
supply
chain

9

32

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

6

0

0

0

0

3

8

2

0

0

3

4

4

0

0

Remanufacturing

10

23

1

2

0

0

0

0

1

2

0

0

0

1

0

6

0

0

1

0

0

4

4

1

General
in value
chain

72

40

26

13

72

87

86

284

5

6

9

18

35

259

79

21

40

65

63

112

95

101

Total
literature
occurrence
in all ﬁelds

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 31 of 66
25


the ﬁeld remanufacturing, because more complexity sources must be considered. As also seen in Table 11, market
complexity, product and product portfolio complexity and
organizational complexity are complexity driver categories
that inﬂuence all ﬁelds in manufacturing companies. Thus,
these categories are the most important in the company and
must be managed ﬁrst for a target-oriented complexity
management. Another important category which has an
inﬂuence on many ﬁelds in the company is society complexity. This category must also be managed for a targetoriented complexity management. Furthermore, all ﬁelds
are inﬂuenced by internal and external complexity driver
categories. However, the different ﬁelds are mostly inﬂuenced by internal driver categories, which can be inﬂuenced actively by the company itself. When further
investigating the different ﬁelds, it can be seen that the
ﬁelds general in manufacturing companies, logistics, production, order processing/distribution/sale and internal
supply chain are mostly inﬂuenced by internal autonomous
complexity driver categories. Internal autonomous complexity driver categories are not inﬂuenced by external
factors and are determined by the company itself. In contrast, the ﬁeld remanufacturing is inﬂuenced mostly by
internal correlated complexity driver categories. The
internal correlated complexity driver categories have a
direct correlation to company’s environment (e.g., market
and society) and are inﬂuenced by it. The ﬁelds product
development, procurement/purchasing and general in value
chain are inﬂuenced almost to the same extend by internal
correlated as well as internal autonomous complexity driver categories.
In the next step, we tried to identify the main complexity
driver categories in the referred ﬁelds. In the literature, the
following approaches are applied to identify the most
important factors among many factors: factor analysis
[9, 41], factor screening [139], DoE—design of experiments [259] and Pareto-analysis [135].
The factor analysis is a statistical method and used for
data reduction in an empirical research or experiments. The
aim is to get a small set of variables from a large set of
variables to identify the most important factors [9, 41].
Kleijnen [139] uses the factor screening method in simulation experiments to identify the most important factors:
‘‘Factor screening […] means that the analysts are
searching for the most important factors among the many
factors that can be varied in their experiment’’ [139]. For
screening, Kleijnen [139] uses different screening designs
to treat the simulation model as a black box. Another
method to identify variables, which have the most inﬂuence
on other variables or parameters in an experiment, is the
design of experiments (DoE). The DoE is normally used
for the development and optimization of products and
processes [259]. Another approach for identiﬁcation and

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

separation of the most important factors among many
factors is the Pareto-analysis. The Pareto-principle
describes that 80% of the effects come from 20% of the
causes [135]. All of the mentioned principles can be used
to identify the most important factors, variables or inputs.
However, none of these approaches were applicable to
identify the main complexity driver categories in our
opinion. The approaches factor analysis, factor screening
and design of experiments are based on experiments,
whereas the Pareto-principle can be used more generally
without experiments. The Pareto-principle is based on
effects and causes. Transferred to our research, the cause
would be the number of a complexity driver’s categories
appearance in the literature and the effect would be the
importance of the speciﬁc category. Since it would be
¨
naıve to derive the importance of a speciﬁc complexity
driver’s category from its number of appearances in the
literature, this principle also wasn’t applicable. Further
research is necessary to identify an approach for analyzing
and identifying important complexity driver categories.

4 Conclusion and outlook
Before starting our research, we reviewed the literature and
searched for existing literature studies about complexity
drivers and gaps in the literature. As a result of our literature search, we identiﬁed four literature studies about
complexity drivers, which have been done by Meyer [174],
Serdarasan [255, 256] and Wildemann and Voigt [289].
After identiﬁcation, the previous literature studies were
analyzed and evaluated based on the following eleven
criteria (see also Table 4): type of literature study, focus;
research period; amount of identiﬁed literature sources,
complexity driver’s deﬁnition, described complexity drivers and complexity driver’s categories; determination of
research questions, databases, search terms and synthesizing methods; and comparison of literature ﬁndings’ with
other literature sources or empirical research data.
The existing studies comprise several literature sources
in the period between 1991 and 2011. However, a systematic, explicit and reproducible method for literature’s
identiﬁcation, evaluation and synthesizing is not described.
To describe the current state of knowledge in a particular
ﬁeld of research, it is essential to determine the research
questions, databases, search terms, the synthesizing methods and to compare the ﬁndings with other literature
sources. Only Wildemann and Voigt [289] and Serdarasan
[256] compare their ﬁndings with the ﬁndings of other
literature sources. Another important criteria for the scientiﬁc research are the speciﬁcation of the different literature sources about complexity drivers, the trends in the
the previous literature studies. Furthermore, only the ﬁelds
logistics, supply chain and general in manufacturing
companies are described. In the literature, an overview
regarding complexity drivers general in manufacturing
companies and in all parts along the value chain does not
exist so far. Another deﬁcit in the existing studies is that
they present only one deﬁnition of complexity drivers. In
our opinion, different deﬁnitions of complexity drivers
should be analyzed, compared and discussed to identify all
characteristics of complexity drivers. In the already mentioned studies, no approaches for identiﬁcation and operationalization are described. Only one method for
complexity driver’s visualization is described by Wildemann and Voigt [289]. For the researcher, it is important to
know that a complexity driver is and what approaches can
be applied for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization. Our purpose is to provide
an overview about different deﬁnitions and methods for
complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and
visualization for closing these research gaps. In addition,
we develop a new overall deﬁnition of complexity drivers
to summarize all characteristics.
To provide this literature review and to fulﬁll the all
requirements, we used the methodology of Fink [78]. The
research method is described in Sect. 2. First, we started
our research process by deﬁning our research questions,
which guide the literature review. The search term was
deﬁned by ﬁnding the lowest common denominator of the
many different paraphrases of the term complexity driver
that exist in the literature. Then, we deﬁned our databases.
For our research, we deﬁned our search terms in English
and German to extend the results and to prevent the
elimination of important articles. The literature search was
performed in eight English and German databases and
resulted in 11.425 literature sources. For analyzing and
synthesizing the literature, we followed the approach of the
qualitative content analysis. The synthesizing process
ﬁnally resulted in 235 relevant papers in the time period
between 1991 and 2015. Before 1991, no relevant literature
sources according to the issue complexity drivers were
found in our research. The reasons could be attributed to
complexity management’s evolution over the last 25 years
and the principal deﬁnition and understanding of the term
‘‘complexity driver’’. Analyzing the overall trend of the
literature regarding complexity drivers in manufacturing
companies and along the value chain shows an increased
interest throughout the last 10 years (see Fig. 5). Seventyfour percent of all publications were published between
2004 and 2015. More than 50% of all the publications
about complexity drivers were published in journals and
PhD theses. Thus, complexity drivers have a high importance in scientiﬁc research. In our research, we found out

Page 33 of 66

25

that 212 papers described speciﬁc complexity drivers in
manufacturing companies and along the value chain. After
analyzing and synthesizing these papers, we identiﬁed 223
different literature parts concerned with complexity drivers
in the two categories manufacturing companies (108 parts)
and along the value chain (115 parts). Eleven papers
describe both parts. The trends of the two categories during
the last 25 years show that there is an increasing interest in
complexity drivers along the value chain in scientiﬁc literature in the last 10 years (see Fig. 6). However, the most
publications general in manufacturing companies were
published between the years 1998 and 2010. Comparing
these trends shows that complexity drivers are now
described more in detail regarding different parts along the
value chain. This indicates that complexity drivers gain
more and more importance for scientiﬁc research. In the
next step, the data from the category complexity drivers
along the value chain were separated in the following eight
different ﬁelds and analyzed: product development (PD),
procurement/purchasing (PC), logistics (L), production
(PR), order processing/distribution/sale (OPD), internal
supply chain (SC), remanufacturing (R) and general in
value chain (VC). The analysis shows that the amount of
publications about complexity drivers in all eight different
ﬁelds has increased over the last 10 years.
This paper describes a variety of deﬁnitions and methods for identiﬁcation, operationalization and visualization
of complexity drivers. Within the last decades, complexity
has increased continuously in many industries, caused by
internal and external sources named complexity drivers.
Identifying, analyzing and understanding complexity drivers are the ﬁrst steps in developing and implementing a
clear strategy to handle complexity in the company. For an
effective complexity management, it is necessary to know
the key drivers of complexity in a system, because they are
the main adjusting levers for company’s success. Furthermore, managing a system’s complexity requires an optimum ﬁt between internal and external complexity. Thus,
complexity drivers play a signiﬁcant role for complexity
management and are a strategic issue for companies to be
competitive.
For this literature review, we determined three research
questions, which were answered as follows. Before identiﬁcation, it is necessary to understand what a complexity
driver is [144, 174]. To answer the ﬁrst research question, the
identiﬁed literature was analyzed and synthesized. The
researched literature contains several different deﬁnitions of
complexity drivers, deﬁned by thirty-six authors. Based on
their content, the deﬁnitions can be assigned to ﬁve main
categories: factors, indicators, sources, parameters/variables
and symptoms/phenomenon. As a result, there is no universal
understanding of the term ‘‘complexity driver‘‘, but the
identiﬁed deﬁnitions tend toward similar deﬁnitions. To


generate a general deﬁnition of complexity drivers, we
analyzed the existing deﬁnitions by identifying their hypernyms and differentia. Several different hypernyms for the
genus term complexity driver exist in the literature, but we
came to the conclusion that only the term factor covers the
general understanding of a complexity driver in total. Then,
the existing differentia found in the literature were clustered
into ﬁve groups based on their differences and commonalities. Based on the ﬁve groups of differentia and in combination with the hypernym term factor, we generated a more
general deﬁnition of complexity driver.
A speciﬁc and target-oriented complexity management is
based on identiﬁcation, visualization and operationalization
of system’s complexity drivers. In the literature, several
different methods for identiﬁcation, operationalization and
visualization of complexity drivers are applied (see
Tables 9, 10). Based on this literature review and to answer
the second research question, twenty-one different approaches were identiﬁed in the literature for complexity driver’s
identiﬁcation, which were focused on different ﬁelds. The
most applied approaches are expert interviews, process
analysis and system analysis. We didn’t conduct an evaluation of all existing approaches regarding their practical uses.
Our purpose was to reﬂect the different approaches found in
the literature. We identiﬁed eight different approaches for
operationalization and visualization of complexity drivers in
the existing literature. However, a clear assignment of the
different approaches to operationalize and visualize complexity drivers wasn’t possible in all cases. As a result, the
most applied approach in both areas is the classiﬁcation and
driver matrixes. Further research to eliminate this lack of
deﬁnition is needed as well as an evaluation of the existing
approaches’ practical application.
Complexity drivers have a direct inﬂuence on the
company and the value chain. Complexity drivers can be
separated in internal and external drivers, depending on
their origin. Internal complexity drivers can also be differentiated in correlated and autonomous complexity drivers. In the literature, more than 486 different internal and
external complexity drivers were found during our research
in 223 literature parts concerning complexity drivers in
manufacturing companies and along the value chain. For
clustering the 486 complexity drivers, we developed a
superior classiﬁcation system without overlaps between the
different complexity driver categories based upon existing
classiﬁcation systems in the literature, provided by different authors. In summary, our new classiﬁcation system
consists of three main groups (external complexity, internal
complexity and general complexity), four subcategories
(society complexity, market complexity, internal correlated
complexity and internal autonomous complexity) and
twenty-two main complexity driver categories depending
on their origin, characteristic and inﬂuences on other

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25

drivers (see Fig. 7). The identiﬁed 486 complexity drivers
were clustered into these complexity driver categories and
groups. The assignment to the different categories and
groups was done depending on the complexity driver’s
origin, characteristic and inﬂuences on other drivers. Figure 8 presents an overview about the complexity driver
categories and their occurrence in the literature. The third
research question was answered by means of analyzing the
identiﬁed literature and synthesizing the complexity driver
categories in the referred ﬁelds (see Table 11). The basis
for synthesizing the categories is shown in Fig. 8.
In summary, our new literature review covers complexity drivers in manufacturing companies and along the
value chain over a period of 25 years (1991–2015). It
fulﬁlls all requirements in total (see Table 12) and closes
the gap in the literature.
In total, 235 literature sources are identiﬁed and more
than 486 complexity drivers are described and clustered in
39 categories. The research method, including the research
questions, databases, search terms and synthesizing methods, and the results and the trends of complexity drivers in
the literature and in the different ﬁelds over the last
25 years are also described. We compare our results with
the ﬁndings of previously published literature. Gaps for
future research are pointed out.
Furthermore, a new deﬁnition of the term ‘‘complexity
driver’’ is speciﬁed, based on the existing deﬁnitions by
identifying a general hypernym and clustering existing
differentia. Different methods that are applied in the literature for complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, evaluation and
visualization are described and give the reader a general
overview. A new classiﬁcation system was developed, and
the complexity driver categories and their complexity drivers general in manufacturing companies and along the
value chain are pointed out (see Appendix Table 15).
The review was focused only on the manufacturing
industry. Future research may also include other sectors or
industries such as ﬁnancing and/or insurance. It would also
be interesting to compare the research results from other
sectors with the results of this paper. In addition, the
ﬁndings of this paper should be evaluated regarding their
impact and relevance on practice by an empirical research
analogously to the empirical research done by Wildemann
and Voigt [289]. Further, the different approaches for
complexity driver’s identiﬁcation, operationalization and
visualization should be evaluated by the practice within an
empirical research according to the following three categories: amount of work, data volume and level of difﬁculty.
Also, the different approaches should be evaluated
regarding their speciﬁc ﬁelds of application. This information could encourage the user to ﬁnd the right approach
for his speciﬁc ﬁeld of interest. Further research may also

25

Table 12 Evaluation of our new literature review about complexity drivers in comparison with existing literature studies
Author(s)

Meyer [174]

Serdarasan
[255]

Wildemann
and Voigt [289]

Serdarasan
[256]

New literature
review

Type of literature study

Overview

Review

Overview

Review

Review

Focus
General in manufacturing companies

•

•

•
•

Product development

•

Procurement/purchasing
Logistics

•

•
•
•

Production
Order processing/distribution/sale
•

Internal supply chain

•

•

Remanufacturing

•

General in value chain

•

Research period

1992–2004

1998–2011

1991–2010

1992–2011

1991–2015

Identiﬁed literature sources

19

25

17

38

235

Complexity driver’s deﬁnitions

1

1

1

1

18 ? 1

Described complexity drivers

127

27

95

32

486

Complexity driver categories

14

3

11

9

22

Literature review’s results: amount of…

Determination of … by the author(s)
Research questions

–

–

–

–

??

Databases

–

–

–

–

??

Search terms

–

–

–

–

??

–

–

–

–

??

Synthesizing methods
Literature ﬁndings’ comparison with…
Other literature sources

–

–

??

??

??

Empirical research data

–

–

??

–

Future research

Evaluation criteria: fulﬁlled (??), precise research questions, databases, search terms and synthesizing methods, are described. The literature
ﬁndings are compared with other literature sources or empirical research data; not fulﬁlled (-), precise research questions, databases, search
terms and synthesizing methods are not described. The literature ﬁndings are not compared with other literature sources or empirical research
data

most important complexity driver’s categories. As already
mentioned, further research will be needed to create helpful
advice for practitioners to detect complexity issues and to
present methodological support to detect complexity causes and their effects.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Professor
Herbert Kotzab, the associate editor, and the anonymous reviewers for
their detailed and constructive comments that signiﬁcantly improved
this study.
Compliance with ethical standards

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.

Appendix
See Tables 13, 14 and 15.

Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.

Focus

General in manufacturing companies

Product development

Table 13 Framework and results of literature collection during the period January 01, 1900–December 31, 2015

‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’
¨
¨
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)
‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)
¨
¨
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’
‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’
¨
¨
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)

Emerald
GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore

0

424
3610

16/05/23
16/05/23
Total

Complexity NEAR/3 driver*

SpringerLink

16/05/23

16/04/06

16/05/06
16/05/06
16/06/06
16/06/06

16/06/06
16/06/06

(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND ‘‘product development’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Produktentwicklung’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND ‘‘product development’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Produktentwicklung’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND ‘‘product development’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND Produktentwicklung
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (product development)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND ‘‘Produktentwicklung’’
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND ‘‘product development’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND Produktentwicklung
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND product development
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND Produktentwicklung
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND ‘‘product development’’

Emerald
GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

Total

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/05/06

16/05/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘Produktentwicklung’
(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND ‘product development’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Produktentwicklung’’

EBSCOhost

16/05/23

911

75

100

206

0

4

229
0

0

77

167

5

42

2

0

4

0

294

540

0

0
11

complexity W/3 driver*
¨
¨
Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)

16/05/23
16/05/23

887

0

261

507

38

290

12

ScienceDirect

JSTOR

16/05/22

0
346

complexity NEAR/3 driver
¨
¨
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)
‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)
¨
¨
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)

16/05/22

16/05/22

16/05/22

16/05/22

16/05/22

16/05/20

16/05/20

16/05/20
16/05/20

¨
¨
‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)
‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)
¨
¨
‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’

EBSCOhost

Search terms

Results

Page 36 of 66

Date

25

117
968

16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06
Total

(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND (‘‘procurement’’ OR ‘‘purchasing’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND (‘‘Beschaffung’’ OR ‘‘Einkauf’’)
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND (‘‘procurement’’ OR ‘‘purchasing’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND (‘‘Beschaffung’’ OR ‘‘Einkauf’’)
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND (‘‘procurement’’ OR ‘‘purchasing’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Beschaffung OR Einkauf)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (procurement OR purchasing)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND (‘‘Beschaffung’’ OR ‘‘Einkauf’’)
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND (‘‘procurement’’ OR ‘‘purchasing’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Beschaffung OR Einkauf)
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND (procurement OR purchasing)
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Beschaffung OR Einkauf)
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND (procurement OR purchasing)

GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

16/04/06

16/04/06
16/04/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06

(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND ‘‘logistics’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Logistik’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND ‘‘logistics’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Logistik’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND ‘‘logistics’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Logistik)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (logistics)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND ‘‘Logistik’’
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND ‘‘logistics’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND Logistik
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND logistics
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND Logistik
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND logistics

Emerald
GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

Total

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/05/06

16/05/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘Logistik’
(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND ‘logistics’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Logistik’’

EBSCOhost

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

Emerald

0

837

98

143

73

0

3

2

45

0

81

8
260

110

6

0

8

0

169

108

0

11

1

54

75
0

314

13

98

3

0

5

16/04/06
16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND (‘Beschaffung’ OR ‘Einkauf’)

Results

(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND (‘procurement’ OR ‘purchasing’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND (‘‘Beschaffung’’ OR ‘‘Einkauf’’)

Procurement/Purchasing

Date

Search terms

EBSCOhost

Focus

Table 13 continued

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 37 of 66
25


Order Processing

Focus

245
1501

16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06
Total

(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND ‘‘production’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Produktion’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND ‘‘production’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Produktion’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND ‘‘production’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Produktion)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (production)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND ‘‘Produktion’’
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND ‘‘production’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND Produktion
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND production
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND Produktion
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND production

GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

16/04/06

16/04/06
16/04/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06

(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND ‘order processing’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND Auftrags*
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND ‘‘order processing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND Auftrags*
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND ‘‘order processing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND Auftrags*
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND ‘‘order processing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Auftrags*)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (order processing)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND Auftrags*
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND ‘‘order processing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND Auftrags*
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND order processing
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND Auftrags*
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND ‘‘order processing’’

Emerald
GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

Total

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/05/06

16/05/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND Auftrags*

EBSCOhost

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

Emerald

0

16/04/06

1257

16

146

298

0

0

3

480

0

14

0
223

75

1

0

1

0

198

176

0

46

1

161

156
0

379

0

118

7

0

14

16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘Produktion’
(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND ‘production’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Produktion’’

EBSCOhost

Results

Database

Table 13 continued
Date

Page 38 of 66

Search terms

25

306
1619

16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06
Total

(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND (‘‘distribution’’ OR ‘‘sale’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND (‘‘Vertrieb’’ OR ‘‘Verkauf’’)
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND (‘‘distribution’’ OR ‘‘sale’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND (‘‘Vertrieb’’ OR ‘‘Verkauf’’)
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND (‘‘distribution’’ OR ‘‘sale’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Vertrieb OR Verkauf)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (distribution OR sale)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND (‘‘Vertrieb’’ OR ‘‘Verkauf’’)
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND (‘‘distribution’’ OR ‘‘sale’’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Vertrieb OR Verkauf)
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND (distribution OR sale)
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Vertrieb OR Verkauf)
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND (distribution OR sale)

GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

16/04/06

16/04/06
16/04/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06

(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND ‘supply chain’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Supply Chain’’
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND ‘‘supply chain’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Supply Chain’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND ‘‘supply chain’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Supply Chain’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND ‘‘supply chain’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Supply Chain)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (supply chain)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND ‘‘Supply Chain’’
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND ‘‘supply chain’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND Supply Chain
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND supply chain
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Supply Chain’’
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND ‘‘supply chain’’

Emerald
GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

Total

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/05/06

16/05/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘Supply Chain’

EBSCOhost

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

Emerald

0

702

97

81

96

0

3

1

64

0

87

8
170

79

7

0

9

0

152

225

0

58

2

282

163
0

296

14

101

6

0

14

16/04/06
16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND (‘Vertrieb’ OR ‘Verkauf’)

Results

(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND (‘distribution’ OR ‘sale’)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND (‘‘Vertrieb’’ OR ‘‘Verkauf’’)

Distribution/Sale

Date

Search terms

EBSCOhost

Focus

Table 13 continued

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 39 of 66
25


123
16/04/06

16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06
16/05/06

16/06/06
16/06/06

(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR ‘‘driver of complexity’’) AND ‘‘remanufacturing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber ndj3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Refabrikation’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR (driver* ndj3 complexity)) AND ‘‘remanufacturing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Refabrikation’’
(‘‘complexity driver*’’ OR ‘‘driver* of complexity’’) AND ‘‘remanufacturing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND (Refabrikation)
(complexity NEAR/3 driver) AND (remanufacturing)
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR (‘‘Treiber Komplexitat’’*5)) AND ‘‘Refabrikation’’
(‘‘complexity driver’’ OR (‘‘driver complexity’’*5)) AND ‘‘remanufacturing’’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber*’’ OR (Treiber W/3 Komplexitat)) AND Refabrikation
(complexity W/3 driver*) AND remanufacturing
¨
¨
(Komplexitatstreiber OR (Treiber NEAR/3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘‘Refabrikation’’
(Complexity NEAR/3 driver*) AND ‘‘remanufacturing’’

Emerald
GENIOS/WISO
Google Scholar
IEEE Xplore
JSTOR
ScienceDirect
SpringerLink

Total

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/06/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

16/04/06

¨
¨
(‘Komplexitatstreiber’ OR (Treiber N3 Komplexitat)) AND ‘Refabrikation’
(‘complexity driver*’ OR (driver* N3 complexity)) AND ‘remanufacturing’
¨
¨
(‘‘Komplexitatstreiber’’ OR ‘‘Treiber d* Komplexitat’’) AND ‘‘Refabrikation’’

EBSCOhost

20

8

1

4

0

0

0

1

3
0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

Results

Database

Table 13 continued
Date

Page 40 of 66

Search terms

25
¨
Schafer and
Henning [221]1
Reiß [211]1
Schmidt [227]1
Schulte [248]1
Rathnow [217]1
Reiß [212]1
Reiß [213]1
Rao and Young
[207]2
Weber [278]1
Fleck [79]1
Hadamitzky
[106]1
¨
Hoge [118]1
Kaiser [125]1
Kestel [131]1
¨
Kuhl [153]1
Schulte [249]1
Stark and Oman
[261]2
Wildemann
[281]1
Vizjak and
Schiffers
[271]1
Raufeisen [208]1
Warnecke and
Puhl [276]1
Adam [1]1

Authors

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers
RQ2
Approach for…

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

•
•
•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•

•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•

•

•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•
•
•
•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

•

PD

PC

•

•

•

L

Value chain

RQ3
Information about complexity drivers

•
•

•

•

Deﬁnition
of
complexity
drivers
Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

RQ1

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Table 14 Results of literature analysis

PR

•

•

OPD

SC

R

VC

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 41 of 66
25

Schmitting
[14]1
Bliss [22]1
Bohne [26]1
Calinescu et al.
[50]2
Eversheim,
Schenke and
Warnke [73]1
Komorek [146]1
¨
Koster [147]1
Picot and
Freudenberg
[200]1
Rosemann [216]1
Wangenheim
[275]1
Wildemann
[282]1
Benett [13]1
Flynn and Flynn
[80]2
Heina [111]1
Piller and
Waringer
[202]1
Puhl [204]1
Raufeisen [209]1
Reiners and
Sasse [210]1
Wildemann
[283]1
Wildemann
[284]1
Bliss [23]1

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

•
•

•
•

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers
•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

•

PD

•

PC

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers

RQ2

Approach for…

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

•

•

PR

•

OPD

SC

R

VC

Authors

•

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Table 14 continued

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

Page 42 of 66

RQ3

25
Westphal [280]1
Franke and
Firchau [81]1
Große Entrup
[99]1
Schuh and
Schwenk
[239]1
Schwenk-Willi
[252]1
Biersack [17]1
Fehling [76]1
Deloitte [60]2
Kim and
Wilemon
[133]2
Kirchhof [134]1
Klabunde [136]1
Meier and
Hanenkamp
[171]1
Pepels [197]1
A.T. Kearney
[7]2
Dehnen [59]1
Große-Heitmeyer
and Wiendahl
[100]1
Hanenkamp
[107]1

Authors

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers
Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

•

PD

PC

•

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers
Complexity
driver’s
visualization

RQ3

RQ2

Approach for…

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Table 14 continued

•

PR

OPD

SC

R

•

VC

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 43 of 66
25

Moos and
Schwellbach
[108]1
Klaus [138]1
Keuper [132]1
Klepsch [140]1
Payne and Payne
[196]2
Perona and
Miragliotta
[198]2
Purle [205]1
Rall and
¨
Dalhofer
[206]1
Wegehaupt
[279]1
Blecker,
Friedrich,
Kaluza,
Abdelkaﬁ,
Kreuther [19]2
Blecker, Kersten
and Meyer
[21]2
Eichen et al.
[69]1
Geimer [84]1
Greitemeyer and
Ulrich [95]1
Jania [122]1
Krumm and
Schopf [151]1
Klinkner, Mayer
and Thom
[141]1

•

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•
•

•
•

•
•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•
•

•

•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers
PD

PC

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

•

PR

OPD

•

•

•

•

SC

R

VC

Authors

•

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Table 14 continued

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

Page 44 of 66

RQ3

25
Schweiger [251]1
Wildemann
[285]1
Anderson et al.
[5]2
Giannopoulos
[87]2
¨
¨
Großler, Grubner
and Milling
2
[101]
Kaluza, Bliem
and Winkler
[126]2
Kersten et al.
[129]2
Mansour [167]1
Piller [201]1
Rudzio, Apitz
and Denkena
[217]1
Schuh, Sauer and
¨
Doring [241]1
Vickers and
Kodarin [270]2
Denk [61]1
Hauptmann
[110]1
Krause, Franke
and
Gausemeier
[149]1
Kohagen [143]1
¨
Lubke [164]1

Authors

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

•
•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

•

PD

•

•

PC

•

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers
Complexity
driver’s
visualization

RQ3

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Table 14 continued

•

•

PR

•

OPD

•

•

SC

R

VC

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 45 of 66
25

Mayer [170]1
Meyer [174]1
Meyer and
Brunner [175]1
Ruppert [218]1
Steger, Amann
and Maznevski
[263]2
Waldthausen
[273]1
Wildemann
[286]1
Aurich and
Grzegorski [8]1
Bick and DrexlWittbecker
[16]1
Curran, Elliger
¨
and Rudiger
[57]1
Feldhusen and
Gebhardt [77]1
Gabath [83]1
Greitemeyer,
Meier and
Ulrich [96]1
Scheiter, Scheel
and Klink
[223]1
Schmidt,
Wienholdt and
¨
Vorspel-Ruter
[229]1
Schubert [237]1
Asan [6]2
Ballmer [10]1

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•
•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•
•
•

•

•
•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•

•

•
•

•
•
•
•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers
PD

PC

•
•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

•

PR

•

OPD

•

•

•

SC

R

•

VC

Authors

•
•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Table 14 continued

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

Page 46 of 66

RQ3

25
Dalhofer [58]1
Denk and
Pfneissl [62]1
Dombrowski
et al. [64]1
¨
Dopke, Kress
¨
and Kuhl [65]1
F.A.Z. – Institut
Management
[74]1
Gronau and
Lindemann
[98]1
Helfrich [112]1
Lasch and
Gießmann
[155]1
Lasch and
Gießmann
[156]1
Lindemann and
Gronau [159]1
Lindemann,
Maurer and
Braun [160]2
Moos [178]1
Nurcahya [179]1
Schmid [225]1
Schmidt [228]1
¨¨
Tenhiala [267]2
Wildemann
[287]1
Abdelkaﬁ,
Blecker, Pero
[2]2

Authors

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

•

•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

•

•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers
PD

PC

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers
Complexity
driver’s
visualization

RQ3

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Table 14 continued

•

•

PR

OPD

•

•

SC

R

VC

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 47 of 66
25

Blockus [24]1
Buob [46]1
Gießmann [88]1
Gießmann and
Lasch [89]1
Grussenmeyer
and Blecker
[104]2
Herrmann [115]1
Klug [142]1
Schließmann
[224]1
Schmitt,
¨
Vorspel-Ruter
and Wienholdt
1
[230]
Schwandt and
Franklin [250]2
Servatius [257]1
Amann, Nedopil
and Steger [4]2
Belz and Schmitz
[12]1
Brosch et al.
[37]1
Brosch et al.
[38]1
¨
Fassberg et al.
[75]2
Gießmann and
Lasch [90]1
Gullander et al.
[105]2
Isik [121]2

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

•

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•

•

•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•
•

•

•
•
•
•
•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

•

PD

•

PC

•

•

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

•

•

•

PR

•

•

OPD

•

•

•

SC

R

•

•

VC

Authors

•

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Table 14 continued

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

Page 48 of 66

RQ3

25
Manuj and Sahin
[166]2
Minhas,
Lehmann and
Berger [176]2
Ortner, Hanusch
and Schweiger
[181]1
Parry, Purchase
and Mills
[194]2
Schawel and
Billing [222]1
Schuh et al.
[238]1
Scott, Lundgren
and Thompson
[253]2
Serdarasan
[255]2
Stich et al. [265]1
Wildemann and
Voigt [289]1
Brosch et al.
[40]2
Collinson and
Jay [54]2
Eigner, Anderl
and Stark [70]1
ElMaraghy et al.
[71]2

Authors

•

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•

•

PD

•

•

•

PC
•

L

Value chain

•

•

•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

Information about complexity drivers
Complexity
driver’s
visualization

RQ3

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Table 14 continued

•

•

•

•

PR

OPD

•

•

•

•

SC

R

VC

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 49 of 66
25

et al. [86]2
Haumann et al.
[109]2
Hering et al.
[114]1
Kersten,
Lammers and
Skride [130]1
Klagge and
Blank [137]1
Lammers [154]1
¨
Schomann [232]1
Steinhilper et al.
[264]1
Wildemann
[290]1
Zhang and Yang
[293]2
Aelker,
Bauernhansl
and Ehm [3]2
Binckebanck and
Lange [18]1
Borowski and
Henning [27]1
Brandenburg
[31]2
Gille [91]1
¨
Gotzfried [94]2
¨
Jager et al. [123]1

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

•

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•
•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

•
•
•

•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

•

PD

PC

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

•

PR

•

•

•

•

OPD

•

•

•

SC

•

•

R

VC

Authors

•

•
•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Table 14 continued

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

Page 50 of 66

RQ3

25
Grotenhuis and
Goor [158]2
Schuh, Krumm
and Amann
[243]1
Seifert et al.
[254]2
Serdarasan
[256]2
Brandenburg
et al. [32]2
Budde and
Golovatchev
[45]1
Butzer et al.
[48]2
Ehrlenspiel et al.
[68]1
Grimm, Schuller
and Wilhelmer
[97]1
Henning and
Borowski
[113]1
Huber [119]1
Jensen, Bekdik
and Thuesen
[124]2
Krah [148]1
Link [161]1

Authors

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

•

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

•

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•

PD

PC

L

Value chain

•

PR

OPD

•

SC

•
•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

•

•

•
•
•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

Information about complexity drivers
Complexity
driver’s
visualization

RQ3

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Table 14 continued

•

•

R

•

VC

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 51 of 66
25

Rebentisch and
Oehmen [162]2
Mahmood, Rosdi
and Muhamed
[165]2
Sauter [220]1
Schoeneberg
[233]1
¨
Schottl et al.
[236]2
Schuh et al.
[246]1
Schuh et al.
[247]2
Schuh et al.
[245]1
Stauder et al.
[262]2
Thiebes and
Plankert [268]1
Wassmus [277]1
Zimmermann
and Fabisch
[294]1
Bode and
Wagner [25]2
Bosch-Rekveldt
et al. [28]2
Bretzke [33]1
Christ [52]1
Claeys et al.
[53]2
Ehrenmann [67]1

•

•

•

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

•
•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

•

•

•

PD

•

PC

•

•

L

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers

RQ2

Approach for…

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

•

•

•

•

PR

•

OPD

•

SC

R

VC

Authors

•

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

Table 14 continued

Complexity
driver’s
visualization

Page 52 of 66

RQ3

25

•

General
statement
about
complexity
drivers

German;

2

English

36

•

Complexity
driver’s
identiﬁcation

17

Complexity
driver’s
operationalization

18

•

212

•

•

•

•
•

•

•

Overview
about
complexitty
drivers

108

•

General in
manufacturing
companies

Fields

6

PC

18

L

25

•

•

PR

13

•

OPD

Total value chain: 115

17

•

PD

Value chain

Information about complexity drivers
Complexity
driver’s
visualization

RQ3

RQ2

Approach for…

26

•

SC

4

R

6

•

VC

15

Using Bliss’
classiﬁcation

PD product development, PC procurement/purchasing, L logistics, PR production, OPD order processing/distribution/sale, SC internal supply chain, R remanufacturing, VC general in value
chain

1

31

•

Deﬁnition of
complexity
drivers

RQ1

Content of literature sources based on literature’s analysis

Language of literature source:

Krizanits [150]1
Oyama,
Learmonth and
Chao [193]1
Reuter, Prote and
¨
Stower [214]1
Schmidt [226]1
Schmitz [231]1
Schott,
Horstmann and
Bodendorf
[235]2
Schuh, Gartzen
and Wagner
[244]2
Sun and Rose
[266]2
Wallner, Brunner
and Zsifkovits
[274]2
Wulf, Redlich
and Wulfsberg
[291]1
Total
Amount of
German
Sources: 169
English
Sources: 66

Authors

Table 14 continued

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 53 of 66
25

Social behavior
Social requirements
Change of company’s environment
Environmental awareness
Economical framework conditions
Country-speciﬁc requirements
Ecological conditions/factors
Turbulences in company’s environment

External complexity

Market complexity
General market-related complexity drivers
Market framework conditions
Markets requirements
Markets size
Markets uncertainty
Saturation of the market
Markets extensiveness
Demand-related complexity drivers
Globalization of the demand
Individuality of customer demands
Fluctuation in demand
Competitive-related complexity drivers
Number of competitors
Competitive demands
Competitive activities
Supply-related complexity drivers
Number of suppliers
Suppliers reliability
Suppliers change
Heterogeneity of supplied objects
Supply strategy
Number of part deliveries
Uncertainty of delivery quality
Technological-related complexity drivers (external)
Technological progress
Technological innovations
New technologies and materials

Complexity driver category and their speciﬁc drivers

Origin

of different markets
structure
dynamics
ﬂuctuations
internationalization
globalization

Technological change
Technological intensity
Combination of different technologies

Variety of suppliers
Suppliers qualiﬁcation
Suppliers relationship
Dynamics in the buying market
Globalization of the supply chain
Number of different delivered parts

Strength of competitors
Competitive activities
Competitive pressure

Number of customers
Heterogeneity of customer demands

Number
Markets
Markets
Markets
Markets
Markets

:9
Different technological standards
Technological dynamics
Technology integration

P

:9
Increasing international competition
Competitive dynamics
Competitive differentiation
P
: 19
Suppliers structure
Suppliers network
Number of supplied objects
Source of supply
Number of deliveries
Uncertainty of delivery dates

P

P
: 62
P
: 18
Development of new markets
Markets change
Markets diversity
Markets turbulences
Markets deregulations
Markets protectionism
P
:7
Variety of customer demands
Demand uncertainty

Value change
Political framework conditions
Standards and regulations
Language and cultural differences
Internet
Uncertainty in company’s environment

: 25
Cultural factors (language, working hours,
habit, working method, education)

Table 15 Overview about complexity driver categories and their speciﬁc drivers

Social change
Cultural framework
Cultural differences
Dynamic in company’s environment
Legal factors
Economical networking
Geographical factors
Exponential populations growth
Interdependencies between different
environmental factors

Page 54 of 66

P

25

Product structure/design
Product size
Product performance
Product quality
Conﬂicts between different standards
Product technology
Component type
Variety of parts and modules
Number of applied materials
Number of raw materials in a product
Availability of raw materials
Technological complexity (internal)
Technology complexity general
Technological requirements
Availability of technologies
Effort for technology’s innovations
Type of interfaces
Product development complexity
Development complexity general
Product development’s length
Applied methods or instruments

Target complexity
Amount of different targets
Maturity of target achievement
Ambiguity of targets
Customer complexity
Customer complexity general
Customer’s diversity
Customer’s participation
Degree of customer’s dependency
Product and product portfolio complexity
Product variety
Product range’s structure
Product portfolio’s size
Country-speciﬁc product portfolio
Dynamics in product program change

Origin

Table 15 continued

Development program’s complexity
Number of development partners
Product development’s depth

Technology change/Innovations
Number of different technologies
Technological uncertainty
Type of data medium
Amount of interfaces

Product type
Product weight
Product requirements
Quality standards
Product uncertainty
Number of product technologies
Component variety
Modularity of parts and modules
Variety of applied materials

Product diversity
Number of product modiﬁcations
Product portfolio’s structure
Number of different product lines
Deﬁcits in coordination between the product
development, marketing and sales department
during the product portfolio deﬁnition process

Customer structure
Customer group’s heterogeneity
Long-term customer loyalty

Target’s diversity
Missing target’s comparison

: 15
New technologies
Technology/Innovation compulsion
Technology life cycle
Size of data medium
Criteria of hardware/software tests
P
:8
Product development’s dynamic
Product development’s procedure

P

Product concept
Product geometry
Product function
Engineer standards
Product life cycle
Product innovation
Number of parts and modules
Properties of the applied materials
Heterogeneity of applied materials

: 43
Product range/portfolio
Number of exotic product variants
Customer-speciﬁc product portfolio
Number of product launches

P

: 10
Number of customers
Customer requirements
Diversity of customers relations

P

:7
Dynamics of target adaption
Conﬂict between different targets

P

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 55 of 66
25


Origin

Supply process complexity
Supply process complexity general
Delivery of stocks
Forecast uncertainty
Service complexity
Service complexity general
Remanufacturing complexity
Remanufacturing complexity general
Organizational complexity
Organization (general)
Business segment/industrial sector
Company’s locations
Company’s strategy
Company’s specialization
Number of contractual partners
Number of different nationalities in the company
Number of joint ventures
Number of different ﬁnancial sources
Length of business relationship
Multiplicity of company’s activities
Pricing policy
Number of tasks
Dependencies between different tasks
Number of cooperation partners
Organization’s structure
Deﬁcits in organization structure
Number of organizational units
Variety of hierarchical levels
Employees (general)
Employees qualiﬁcation
Employees experience
Employees workload
Employees absence
Employees striving for power
Shifting of responsibilities
Number of interfaces between other employees
Company’s management
Management’s behavior
Value chain (general)
Organization’s/company’s size
Business culture
Globalization of company’s locations
Changes in company’s strategy
Decision-making process (general)
Conﬁdence in contractual partners
Number of different languages in the company
Structures of joint ventures
Bureaucracy
Avarice for money
Variety of company’s activities
Coordination effort
Tasks’ variety
Degree of centralization
Cooperation intensity
Organization structure’s variety
Reorganization of organization’s structure
Number of organizational levels
Egoism of different departments
Number of employees
Employees’ language
Employees behavior
Working atmosphere
Personnel decision
Employees (negative) emotions
Lack of professional competence
Separation of task, responsibilities and experience
Management’s responsibility
Missing assignment of responsibilities
Value chain structure

Remanufacturing process

Service variety

Supply strategy
Order’s heterogeneity

Task coordination
Degree of labor division
Degree of cooperation
Organization structure’s diversity
Dependencies between organizational units
Degree of centralization
Number of supervisory authorities
Requirement proﬁle and expectations
Employees’ culture
Employees turnover
Uncertainty related to an employee
Labor division and specialization
Employees motivation
Lack of social competence
Lack of motivation and identiﬁcation with companies goals
Management’s philosophy
Unclear assignment of responsibilities
Value chain’s length

:3
Service concept
P
:2
Product’s structure
P
: 105
Company’s legal status
Number of subsidiaries
Company’s business management
Multibrand strategy
Length of decision-making process
Number of different time zones
Handling of risks, uncertainty and incidence
Cash ﬂow dynamics
Business relationship
Data security
Coordination deﬁcits between different departments

P

:7
Number of supply goods
Demand’s ﬂuctuation

Table 15 continued
P

Page 56 of 66

Complexity driver category and their speciﬁc drivers

25

Value chain’s geographical position
Depth of added value
Lack of transparency (general)
Lack in consistency of activities
Lack in complexity management processes
Deﬁcits in methods
Process complexity
Process complexity (general)
Process type
Length of process
Process planning
Process orientation
Process uncertainty
Process standardization
Number of external interfaces
Concentration of process interfaces
Production complexity
Production (general)
Production program
Production program’s heterogeneity
Number of production locations
Size of production area
Production system’s variety
Production strategy
Number of production interfaces
Variety of production steps
Number of work stations
Machine maintenance
Type of work
Degree of production automatization
Material ﬂow’s dynamic
Planning, control and information complexity
Planning content
Lack in strategic planning
Project time
Information variety
Number of controlling authorities
Control instruments

Complexity driver category and their speciﬁc drivers

Scheduling
Number of internal projects
Project’s control
Information asynchrony
Control systems (general)
Control demand’s rate

Production structure
Production program’s structure
Production program’s planning
Production location’s structure
Production system
Size of production system
Production type
Design of production interfaces
Manufacturing technology
Uncertainties in production methods
Breakdown of production machines
Lead time
Production scheduling

Number of processes
Process structure
Process automatization
Process innovations
Process optimization
Process stability
Number of process interfaces
Interfaces’ design

Added value process
Number of steps in value chain
Lack of cost transparency
Missing readiness for change
Lack in complexity management instruments

: 41
Strategic planning
Time pressure in project planning
Number of information
Documentation
Control processes
Control demand’s level of detail

P

Production organization
Number of production processes
Number of production steps
Manufacturing performance
Capacity uncertainty
Production control system
Queue time
Material ﬂow

: 39
Production organization
Production program’s volume
Production program’s network
Geographical position of production locations

P

: 25
Variety of processes
Number of process steps
Process fragmentation
Process dynamic
Special processes
Process connectivity
Number of internal interfaces
Interfaces’ heterogeneity

P

Added value network
Number of non-value added processes
Lack of cost understanding
Subjective evaluation of situations
Weaknesses in transformation of decisions

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:25
Page 57 of 66
25

Information systems
Communication systems
Information ﬂow
Information and data overload
Lack in communication systems
Organization information technology systems
Applied software
Resource complexity
Resource complexity (general)
Resource availability
Sequence of resource’s application
Logistics complexity
Logistic complexity (general)
Logistic chain
Heterogeneity of logistic process
Supply chain general
Supply chain process
Number of supply chain partners
Sales and distribution complexity
Distribution system (general)
Stock level in distribution system
Distribution network
Number of distribution stages
Distribution innovations
Restriction in storage spaces
Order processing (general)
Number of different orders
Order’s heterogeneity
Sales concept
Deﬁnition of customer groups
Number of sale tasks
Sales’ cooperation with other departments

123
Innovations in distribution system
Deﬁcits in distribution system
Number of distribution partners
Distribution channel
Transportation route
Number of pick stations
Order processing’s variety
Order structure
Handling time
Sales pressure
Customer loyalty
Diversity of sale tasks
Marketing strategy
Marketing instruments

Logistic principle
Logistic strategy
Logistic network
Supply chain structure
Supply chain organization
Supply chain synchronization

Resource type
Resource shortage
Restricted ﬂexibility of resources

P
: 40
Distribution system’s output
Distribution process
Number of distribution center
Number of distribution channels
Transportation source
Distribution deadlines
Order processing’s individualization
Order’s size
Sales structure
Sales region
Treaty structure
Sales’ signiﬁcance in the company
Marketing concepts

P
:9
Number of different resources
Application of resources
Resource’s stocks
P
: 17
Logistic structure
Logistic process
Logistic outsourcing
Supply chain size
Supply chain bottleneck

Information and communication network
Variety of information systems
Communication structure
Information deﬁcits
Lack in information systems
Data security
Development of information technology systems

Table 15 continued

Information and communication technologies
Number of information systems
Number of communication systems
Information asymmetry
Information medium
Company’s communication behavior
Structure of information technology systems
Software’s changing

Page 58 of 66

Complexity driver category and their speciﬁc drivers

25

25

Complexity driver category and their speciﬁc drivers

General complexity driver
Variety
Uncertainty
Perception
Cost effectiveness
Transparency
Interaction
Inconsistency
Speed
Amount of actions between units
Ambiguity
General complexity

Table 15 continued

Origin

Diversity
Stability
Time
Quality
Connectivity
Interdependency
Discontinuity
Amount of units and elements
Amount of relationships between units

P
: 28
Dynamics
Instability
Costs
Flexibility
Dependency
Degree of change
Lack of structures
Amount of actions and relationships
Element’s system afﬁliation

mit Dynamik, Unsicherheit und Komplexitat meistern. Springer
