
1 Introduction
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions make a signiﬁcant contribution to atmospheric changes and climate disruptions,
which are harmful to the natural and built environments
and which pose a threat to human health and welfare.
Different anthropogenic GHG contribute to global warming; however, in the transport sector, they are dominated by
CO2 emissions from burning fossil fuels [1].
As almost all CO2 emissions from freight transport
operations are energy related, the most accurate way of
calculating these emissions is to record energy consumption, e.g., in terms of liters of fuel, and to employ standard
emission factors to convert energy values into CO2 [2]. The
amount of fuel consumed by a vehicle, in turn, depends on
a variety of vehicle-, environment-, operations-, and trafﬁcrelated parameters, such as vehicle characteristics, length
of haul, travel speed, payload, road gradient, driving
behavior, trafﬁc conditions, ﬂeet size, ﬂeet mix, and empty
running [3–5]. While some of these factors, such as
transportation technologies and fuels, have improved over
the years, trafﬁc congestion has not diminished, but is
forecast to further increase in many countries, such as
France, Germany, the UK, and the USA [6, 7].
This article is concerned with distribution logistics. It
studies the impact that trafﬁc congestion has on the CO2
emissions of a whole distribution network covering the
factories, the distribution centers (DCs), transshipment
points (TSPs), and the retailers. The starting point of this
research is the idea that, if GHG emission targets are set, it
is important to understand the effects of all GHG determining factors of freight transportation. Studying the
impact of trafﬁc congestion on the CO2 emissions of a
major logistic system, such as a distribution network, is
particularly motivating because this allows an area-wide


assessment and comparison of congestion effects on different types of transport activities.
The focus of this study is on ‘regular trafﬁc congestion,’
which means that there are periodically trafﬁc conditions
on the various road segments that differ from those in the
free-ﬂow situation, i.e., there are periodically higher
numbers of vehicles and other impediments, such as trafﬁc
light circuits, which causes lower average travel speeds
and, eventually, changed itineraries for given origin–destination pairs caused by re-routing decisions. The goal is to
get insights into the ‘average,’ typical exposure of a
logistics network to trafﬁc congestion and the related
effects on CO2 emissions. Unusual events, such as accidents and road works, are neglected.
To gain insights into the effect of regular road trafﬁc
congestion on the volume of CO2 emissions of a distribution network, this research analyzes the distribution network of an existing manufacturer of fast-moving consumer
goods (FMCG). In doing so, it contributes to the literature
by presenting a comprehensive approach to determine the
CO2 footprint of a given distribution network. The presented approach allows for an accurate estimation of CO2
emissions as all relevant transportation ﬂows are represented in a detailed manner. Furthermore, concerning the
approximation of the CO2 volumes emitted during the
transport operations and in contrast to several previous
studies, the number of factors that determine vehicle fuel
consumption and that are taken into account is extensive; it
includes the ﬂeet mix, vehicle characteristics, length of
haul, load factors, empty running, travel speed, and trafﬁc
conditions. In addition, this research shows that online
navigation services are a valuable source of trafﬁc information, which may be used in lots of forthcoming research
projects analyzing CO2 sensitivities and GHG cutting
opportunities in logistics networks. Recent research recommended further work on the provision of reliable and
detailed speed data as travel speed is a highly determining
factor for CO2 emissions and as most effort is usually
dedicated to the measurement and modelling of GHG
emissions, while the quality of the necessary trafﬁc data is
rarely considered [4, 8]. This paper presents a valuable data
source. Finally, this research provides insights into the
extent to which regular trafﬁc congestion affects the
transport-related CO2 emissions of a distribution network
and it investigates to what extent the CO2 volume caused
by trafﬁc congestion changes when the network structure,
in terms of the number and the geographical locations of
the DCs, is modiﬁed.
The results are beneﬁcial for the designers and the
operators of logistics networks who require an understanding of trafﬁc congestion impacts on logistics operations, for instance, when searching for the reasons behind
differences in the CO2 efﬁciency of different transport

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21

activities in different geographical areas. Furthermore, the
designers of the system need to accurately quantify the
problem in order to assess the effectiveness of measures
intended to relieve impairments of trafﬁc congestion; for
instance, on a strategic level, when deciding whether to
install additional logistics facilities, or, on a tactical level,
when deciding to postpone certain transport operations.
The approach presented supports better decision making as
it allows evaluating a priori the extent to which trafﬁc
congestion will affect road freight transport operations in
alternative network conﬁgurations. And, as will be shown,
it is important to consider the trafﬁc congestion effect on
GHG emissions as it contributes to a signiﬁcant percentage
of the total emissions in a distribution network. Finally, the
network model and the data source may be combined in
future research in order to study additional GHG sensitivities of logistics networks (e.g., ﬂeet mix, load factors,
travel time variability, postponement of departure times).

2 Literature review
Demir et al. [4] give an overview of recent research on
green road freight transportation. They review factors
affecting fuel consumption and conclude that vehicle speed
is most important. This ﬁnding is in line with research
outcomes presented by Boulter and McCrae [8], which
highlights the importance of considering the effect of
congestion on the CO2 emissions in logistics networks
because trafﬁc congestion affects travel speed [9]. van
Woensel et al. [10] show that neglecting the congestion
effect leads to an underestimation of trafﬁc ﬂow GHG
emissions as the latter depend largely on the number of
vehicles and the speed of these vehicles.
2.1 Effects of trafﬁc congestion on road freight
transport operations
Trafﬁc congestion affects freight transport operations as it
increases the average travel time and the transit time
variability [11, 12]. Prior research focused on one of these
aspects or studied the consequences of both effects by
explicitly differentiating between ‘recurring daily trafﬁc
delay’ or ‘regular congestion’ and ‘non-recurring trafﬁc
delay’ or ‘major congestion incidents.’ Regular congestion
occurs as vehicle speeds are reduced due to a high volume/capacity ratio on speciﬁc corridors at speciﬁc times.
Non-recurring trafﬁc delays occur when there are incidents
such as collisions, medical emergencies, and vehicle
breakdowns [12, 13]. The focus of this study is on regular
congestion, i.e., the typical road-, weekday-, and time of
to assess the impact of congestion-related unreliability on
logistics activities across many industry sectors. Among
others, they performed trafﬁc data analyses that conﬁrmed
the view expressed by the logistics managers surveyed that
most congestion is regular and predictable. Falcocchio and
Levinson [13] report research results indicating that
recurring bottlenecks are the most common cause of
recurring trafﬁc delays, besides poor trafﬁc signal timing.
This research reports the effects of trafﬁc congestion on
the CO2 emissions of the analyzed distribution network that
are due to weekday- and time of day-typical changes in
travel speeds on the various road segments travelled
throughout the distribution network. In addition, it considers the fact that the vehicle drivers may change the
itinerary to avoid congested roads. Golob and Regan [15],
for instance, report results from a study that indicates that
carriers place a high value on real-time trafﬁc information
to minimize the impact of trafﬁc congestion on their
transport operations. And McKinnon et al. [14] present
interview ﬁndings conﬁrming that commercial vehicle
drivers engaged in delivery operations build up a detailed
awareness of trafﬁc conditions and routing options because
they visit the same region regularly. Both effects, changes
in travel speeds and re-routing decisions, will affect the
characteristics of the transport operations (e.g., average
travel speeds, kilometers travelled, load factors, and the
number of transport operations), which, in turn, change the
CO2 emissions of the distribution network.
2.2 Trafﬁc congestion and green road freight
transportation
Maden et al. [16] present empirical research using realworld trafﬁc data to quantify the effect of trafﬁc congestion
on CO2 emissions from freight transport operations. In
their case study, they analyze the CO2 effects of using
trafﬁc information (time-varying travel speeds) compared
with routing and scheduling where this information is not
available. They use the factor speed in a fuel consumption
model similar to the one used in this research. However,
the level of detail of their CO2 analysis is limited as, for
instance, no attempt has been made to modify the functions
for the weight of goods carried at each stage of the routes
or to consider different vehicle types. The inﬂuence of the
vehicle load weight factor and the vehicle class on the CO2
efﬁciency of road freight transportations is, however,
important and should be considered in GHG analyses, as
research showed [17, 18]. The same is for the research
presented by Figliozzi [19], who used travel time data from
an archive of freeway sensors and time-dependent vehicle
routing algorithms to analyze CO2 emissions for different
levels of congestion and time-deﬁnitive customer demands

Page 3 of 15

21

in urban freight distribution networks. Vehicle loading or
different types of vehicles are not considered in his
research. Barth and Boriboonsomsin [20] examined the
impact of congestion on CO2 emissions by evaluating
typical trafﬁc conditions in a trafﬁc corridor in Southern
California. And Schrank et al. [21] present research about
the extent to which urban congestion has an impact on
wasted fuel and CO2 emissions. While their trafﬁc data
source corresponds to that used in this study, they concentrate on the urban area level and their observations are
therefore limited to vehicle movements in some urban
corridors.
This research advances the understanding of the effect
of trafﬁc congestion on the CO2 emissions from road
freight transportation as it is not limited to only a fraction
of the transport operations executed to move the ﬁnished
goods from the factories to the customers. It explicitly
allows for the comparison of the congestion effect on CO2
emissions of different transport activities and geographical
areas. Furthermore, in this research, the number of factors
determining fuel consumption that is taken into account is
extensive and the analyses are based on a trafﬁc data source
that allows for an area-wide observation of representative
trip characteristics.
2.3 Road trafﬁc data sources
Boulter and McCrae [8] review scientiﬁc studies that highlight the crucial role of the provision of accurate, reliable,
and detailed speed data as an accurate and detailed knowledge of actual driving speeds is fundamental for emission
estimations. They recommend further work on the provision
of reliable and detailed speed data as most effort is usually
dedicated to the measurement and modelling of emissions,
while the quality of the necessary trafﬁc data is rarely considered. And McKinnon and Piecyk [22] present experiences
in the UK that highlight the difﬁculty of compiling an
accurate and consistent set of emissions data for trucking.
This research contributes to overcome that problem.
2.3.1 Conventional data sources
The ‘conventional’ road trafﬁc data sources used for
logistics system analyses are interviews/surveys [23],
trafﬁc information provided by private and/or public
authorities using ‘in situ’ technologies, such as detectors
located along the roadside or vehicle counts [24], and
ﬂoating car data/ﬂeet management systems [25]. In the
latter case, GPS or mobile phone devices are inside the
moving vehicles recording spatially and temporally the
itinerary. Recently, Kellner [26] listed problems that will
arise when measuring congestion effects in large-scale
logistics systems, such as a distribution network, by means


of the conventional data sources: Concerning in situ technologies, trafﬁc sensors are expensive to install and
maintain and they are therefore not widespread [25]. A
nationwide observation of trafﬁc conditions and CO2
emissions, covering the whole distribution network, is not
possible when relying only on trafﬁc information collected
by the means of in situ technologies. The typical concerns
arising from interviews/surveys and ﬂoating car data are a
lack of consistency in the measurements and a lack in
representativeness of the processed data. Consistency in the
measurements is a concern in logistics systems consisting
of several parties, such as shippers and carriers [23]. All of
them have to collect trip/trafﬁc information in a consistent,
complete, correct, and unbiased way. The risk of processing erroneous or biased numbers is particularly high when
the trip/trafﬁc information is collected by the parties
themselves and/or when the study is based on rough estimates. Furthermore, the use of GPS devices to collect trip
data is typically limited to one company, for technological
and behavioral reasons [27]. The representativeness of the
gathered and processed information becomes a concern
when the number of trafﬁc observations on the different
trip segments is low. Boulter and McCrae [8] recommend
that the use of short-term trafﬁc data, observed in trafﬁc
studies over 2 or 3 days/weeks, should be avoided where
possible when analyzing GHG emissions in transport networks as it may reﬂect speciﬁc and/or exceptional trafﬁc
conditions.
2.3.2 Navigation service data
To overcome these problems, this study makes use of
trafﬁc data provided by an online navigation and trafﬁc
information service, such as Bing Maps, Google Maps,
Inrix, Here, and TomTom. The trafﬁc information offered
by these services is valuable for at least four reasons [26]:
(1) As there are concerns about the accuracy of installed
detectors and ﬂoating car data [25, 28], some navigation
service providers use complementary solutions combining
different data sources in order to improve the reliability and
accuracy of the delivered trip/trafﬁc information (e.g.,
historic data records, GPS measurements, local experts’
knowledge, camera imagery, road sensors) [29, 30]. (2) In
contrast to in situ technologies, navigation data allow for
an area-wide observation of trafﬁc conditions as it processes data from in situ technologies and ﬂoating car data.
(3) While the consistency in the measurements is a concern
when using interviews/surveys and ﬂoating car data, data
provided by navigation services are gathered in an objective and consistent way. The trip/trafﬁc data collection
method is the same across all parties involved, and there
are no possibilities for the parties to report erroneous or
biased numbers. Navigation services allow the retrieval of

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21

anonymized and unbiased information with no limitation to
a certain institution or regional area. (4) In general, the
trafﬁc data retrieved from online navigation services will
have a higher level of representativeness than the trafﬁc
information collected by means of interviews/surveys and
ﬂoating car studies. This is true as some online navigation
services allow the retrieval of averaged/smoothed trip
information, i.e., time-typical travel times and delays, for a
given moment in time. Such data have been prepared using
different trafﬁc observation technologies and a large data
history of ﬂoating car data [29, 30]. Fleischmann et al. [31]
explain statistical techniques used by navigation service
providers to estimate time-typical trip data (trip length,
travel time, speed) with high accuracy. In addition, it is
possible to capture the fact that the vehicle drivers occasionally use alternate routes to avoid congested road sections as the time-minimal route changes depending on the
trafﬁc conditions.

3 Methodology
To explore the impact of regular road trafﬁc congestion on
the CO2 emissions of a distribution network, the totality of
transport operations for one calendar year of a real-world
distribution network is observed under two conditions, the
‘free-ﬂow’ and the ‘normal’ trafﬁc situation. This approach
allows isolating the impact of trafﬁc congestion on GHG
emissions. To avoid the results of this study being excessively company speciﬁc due to the locations of the facilities
and to understand how a reconﬁguration of the logistics
network affects the CO2 impact of trafﬁc congestion on the
transportation ﬂows, the number of DCs is experimentally
increased from one to four.
The case company, the dataset, and the distribution
network model that are used in this research have recently
been introduced by Kellner [26], who analyzed the effects
of trafﬁc congestion on distribution network characteristics
in terms of transit times, delays, kilometers travelled,
vehicle operating costs, stock-in-transit, cost per customer,
and the number of transport operations by the means of
navigation service data. This research extends the network
analyses of Kellner [26] by studying the effects of trafﬁc
congestion on the CO2 emissions from transportation. In
detail, it makes use of the network model and the trip data
that have been requested by Kellner [26] from an online
navigation service and combines them with the COPERT
functions [32] to evaluate all transport operations with CO2
emissions. The following sections summarize the network
model and the trafﬁc data acquisition with focus on the
aspects that are relevant for the GHG network analysis.
Furthermore, they explain the translation of the freight

3.1 Case company
The case company is a major German manufacturer of
FMCG/groceries, classiﬁed in Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation (SIC) Group 20 ‘Food and Kindred Products.’ The
FMCG/grocery industry is a useful case because these
products are convenience goods and distributed nationwide. Therefore, the analysis is not restricted to a certain
geographical area.
The focal company operates six factories. These factories are located in Germany and process the products
destined for the German market. The ﬁnished products are
moved by trucks from the factories to one DC and then
onward to the company’s customers, i.e., food/FMCG
retailers, mainly supermarket chains. The food and kindred
products are distributed palletized to supply virtually any
store/supermarket in Germany. Customer locations are
either points-of-sale or retailer DCs.
This company provided a comprehensive dataset with
information on its real-world distribution activities over
one calendar year. The shipment dataset alone contains
details about 20,000 DC inbound and 105,000 DC outbound shipments, with information about the delivery days,
the origin–destination pairs, shipment sizes, and cost
information. A total of 4640 distinct customer locations
have been supplied with a total of 340,000 tons of FMCG.
This dataset has been used to set up a distribution network
model that reﬂects all transportation ﬂows for the calendar
year being considered.

by the case company. The analysis considers the exact
calendar day when the single shipments have been moved
because the typical trafﬁc conditions vary according to the
weekday and the number of shipments is not the same on
each day. In addition, the exact tonnages and the number of
low-volume shipments determine the transport operations
on a daily basis, i.e., the number of consolidated shipments
and the delivery trips. The transport operations have been
classiﬁed into four transportation ﬂows: production ﬂows
(DC inbound shipments), DC-direct shipments, DC-consol
shipments, and delivery trips (Fig. 1).
1.

2.

3.

3.2 Distribution network model
In the distribution network model, all transport operations
are modelled on a daily basis, all locations are on street
number level, and the network ﬂows are those experienced

21

4.

Production ﬂows: These are high-volume shipments
with 17 tons per shipment on average. The production
ﬂows are transported directly from the six factories to
the DC (DC inbound).
DC-direct shipments: These are DC outbound shipments with a tonnage above 5000 kg. DC-direct
shipments are transported directly from the DC to the
customers, i.e., there is no transshipment in between.
DC-consol shipments: DC outbound shipments with a
tonnage below 5000 kg are consolidated at the DC and
forwarded as consolidated shipments via transshipment
points. The TSP locations correspond to the 29 TSP
sites operated by a major German logistics service
provider specializing in the FMCG segment. The
shipments are always transported to the TSP that is
nearest to the customer destination. The consolidation
is modelled taking into consideration exact shipment
days and TSP locations. The typical vehicle capacity
utilization of the DC-consol shipments is 14 tons. In
the distribution network model, this tonnage is
assumed for all DC-consol shipments.
Delivery trips: The goods that are transported with DCconsol shipments to the transshipment points are

Factories (6)

(1) Production flows (DC inbound)
(1)

(2) DC-direct shipments

Distribution center (1)

(3) DC-consol shipments
(3)
(4) Delivery trips

Transshipment points (29)
High-volume shipments

(2)
(4)
Customers (4640)

(4)
1

(Consolidated) Low-volume shipments

Fig. 1 Distribution network model


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21

forwarded in delivery trips to the retailers. The spatial
allocations of demand points to transshipment points
make up the TSP service areas.
For the modelling and the analysis of the trafﬁc effect on
the transport operations, the four transportation ﬂows are
classiﬁed into two trip types, namely line haul shipments
and round trips.
3.2.1 Line haul shipments
Line haul shipments consist of one trip segment, from the
origin to the destination location. The production ﬂows, the
DC-direct shipments, and the DC-consol shipments are in
this class. The trip information that is needed to environmentally evaluate these shipments is requested from the
navigation service by indicating the trips’ starting and ending
points. Typically, articulated heavy goods vehicles (HGVs)
with a maximum payload capacity of 25 tons are used to
move the line haul shipments (Articulated 34–40 tons).

consideration the average tonnage per pallet for DC outbound shipments and comes with a weight-based load
factor of 55 %. tn is the average tonnage demanded by
customers taking part in the considered round trip. This
parameter is determined individually for each round trip
and takes into account all shipments that are delivered to
the customers served on a certain delivery day and in a
certain delivery zone. H is the number of daily working
hours spent on the delivery trips, which is 8.5. s is the
average unloading time at the customers, which is 15 min.
dA is the distance of the approach from the TSP to the ﬁrst
customer, dR is the distance of the return leg from the last
customer back to the TSP, and dL is the local, average
distance between the customers. vA, vR, and vL are the
average travelling speeds on the corresponding legs.
Once the number of customers in a tour is known,
Eqs. (2)–(3) can be used to determine the length l and the
travel time t of the round trip.
l ¼ dA þ d R þ ð n À 1 Þ Â d L
dA dR
dL
þ þ n Â s þ ð n À 1Þ Â
vA vR
vL

ð2Þ
ð3Þ

3.2.2 Round trips

t¼

Round trips consist of several trip segments linking the ﬁrst
and the last tour stop with the TSP and linking the single
tour stops with each other. The delivery trips are in this
class.
In the network model of Kellner [26], a two-step
methodology is used to model the round/delivery trips.
First, the TSP service areas are clustered into subregions,
called ‘delivery zones.’ This makes sure that the delivery
trips created are realistic as they serve a separate group of
customer destinations lying relatively close to each other.
Simultaneously, a centroid is determined for each delivery
zone. The centroids serve to identify ‘reference customers.’
The reference customer of a delivery zone is the customer
that is located nearest to the centroid. Second, Fleischmann’s ‘ring model’ [33] is used to approximate on a
daily basis the delivery trips that supply the customers. The
ring model assumes that the distances between customers
in a certain round trip and the TSP are the same and that all
customers are supplied with the same tonnage on average.
This allows the estimation of the number of customers in a
certain round trip (n), which is the minimum of the number
of customers that can be served due to vehicle capacity
restrictions, and the number of customers that can be
served due to time restrictions:


8
9
<Capa H À dA þ dR þ dL =
vA
vR
vL
n ¼ min
;
ð1Þ
: tn
;
s þ dL
v

For the CO2 analysis, it is important to consider the type
of vehicle that is used to carry out the delivery trips as the
volume of CO2 emissions per kilometer may differ considerably for short-distance round trip vehicles (see below).
Typically, two vehicle types are available: a ‘Rigid
7.5–12 tons’ with a maximum payload capacity of 6 tons
(Capa = 3.3 tons) and a ‘Rigid 20–26 tons’ with a maximum payload capacity of 12 tons (Capa = 6.6 tons). In
order to determine the vehicle that has carried out the
round trip, ﬁrst, the round trip is estimated for the ‘Rigid
20–26 tons.’ If the same round trip could also be run with a
‘Rigid 7.5–12 tons,’ then the ‘Rigid 7.5–12 tons’ is used,
otherwise the ‘Rigid 20–26 tons.’

L

In Eq. (1), Capa is the maximum weight-based vehicle
capacity utilization. It is determined by taking into

123

3.2.3 Changing the number of distribution centers
The number of DCs is changed by determining the costminimal 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-DC conﬁgurations. A p-median
model is used to locate the DCs and to allocate the customers in such a way that the overall transportation costs
are minimized. Once the locations of the DCs are identiﬁed, it is possible to request trip data for all origin–destination pairs that are run in the hypothetic networks [26].
3.3 Translating freight transport operations
into CO2 emissions
As stated above, the most accurate way of calculating
emissions from freight transport operations is to record fuel

21

Table 1 Fuel consumption model: regression parameters [32]
Vehicle type

Rigid 7.5–12 tons (Euro VI) (max.
payload: 6 tons)

Rigid 20–26 tons (Euro VI) (max.
payload: 12 tons)

Articulated 34–40 tons (Euro VI) (max.
payload: 25 tons)

Load factor

0%

0%

0%

50 %

100 %

50 %

100 %

50 %

100 %

a

912.81

884.21

892.07

318.82

-465.38

-1580.66

-56.05

-2077.80

-221.75

b

11.62

10.87

10.46

26.87

155.18

440.59

85.84

593.30

67.97

c
d

-0.17
-439.58

-0.17
-459.96

-0.17
-514.30

2.16
1103.88

5.93
1888.82

12.59
3097.33

3.49
1637.92

14.73
3781.48

1.17
262.81

e

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

f

0.32

0.26

0.23

-0.09

-0.22

-0.28

-0.15

-0.28

-0.00

g

-0.00

-0.00

-0.00

0.02

0.05

0.09

0.03

0.10

0.01

convert the amount of combusted fuel into CO2. When
energy values are not available—for instance, when planning or evaluating future/alternative transport scenarios—
fuel consumption models may be used, which estimate fuel
consumption of transport operations based on a variety of
vehicle-, environment-, and trafﬁc-related parameters, such
as vehicle speed, load factors, road gradients, and acceleration [3, 4, 34]. This research adopts the fuel consumption model ‘COPERT 4,’ as described by the European
Environment Agency (EEA) [32]. COPERT has been
chosen because it is a European-wide accepted methodology to calculate fuel consumption and GHG emissions
from road freight transport. It integrates methods and
results from other accepted scientiﬁc projects (e.g.,
ARTEMIS, COST 319, HBEFA, and MEET), and the
methodology proposed by COPERT is used in other
emission models [4, 8, 35]. Furthermore, COPERT has
been widely used in different studies and proved its adequacy in research on green road freight transportation
[4, 35].
COPERT uses regression functions to estimate the fuel
consumption of HGVs. The independent variable is the
average travel speed on the trip. There are speciﬁc functions depending on the vehicle type, the European emission
standard, road slope, and vehicle load, resulting in almost
12,000 regression models [32]. The various regression
functions have been derived from large-scale real-life
experiments [3, 8]. Equation (4) is the generic function,
which is the same across all combinations of vehicle types,
emission standards, road slopes, and load factors that are
relevant in this research.
À
Á À
Á
FC ¼ a þ b Â v þ c Â v2 þ d=v = e þ f Â v þ g Â v2
ð4Þ
FC is the diesel fuel consumption in g/km, and v is the
average travel speed in km/h. Table 1 summarizes the
regression coefﬁcients a, b, c, d, e, f, and g.
It should be noted that EEA [32] presents regression
functions for three load factors: 0, 50, and 100 %. Because

the effect of vehicle loading on CO2 emissions is linear
with load according to the ARTEMIS data, fuel consumption can be linearly interpolated between the relevant
functions [36]. Furthermore, the functions used in this
research come with a road slope of 0 % as no data were
available for the road gradient. Once the fuel consumption
of the transport operation is known, CO2 emissions may be
calculated by multiplying the fuel consumption FC with an
emission conversion factor. DEFRA [37] proposes
3.1643 (g CO2)/(g diesel), and it is this emission conversion factor that is used.
Figure 2 shows the effect of travel speed on CO2
emissions for the three vehicle types and three load factors.
For low speed values, fuel consumption is high because of
inefﬁciencies in the usage of fuel that decrease as speed

400
CO2 emissions
[kg/100km]

350
Rigid 7.5-12tons (LF: 0%)
Rigid 7.5-12tons (LF: 50%)
Rigid 7.5-12tons (LF: 100%)

300

Rigid 20-26tons (LF: 0%)
Rigid 20-26tons (LF: 50%)
Rigid 20-26tons (LF: 100%)

250

Articulated 34-40tons (LF: 0%)
Articulated 34-40tons (LF: 50%)
Articulated 34-40tons (LF: 100%)

200

150

100

50

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Speed [km/h]

Fig. 2 Vehicle speed and CO2 emissions


increases [3, 20, 38]. For the ‘Rigid 7.5–12 tons’ vehicle,
there is a CO2 minimal speed at about 65 km/h. Higher
speed raises CO2 emissions per kilometer due to the
aerodynamic drag. According to Eq. (4), for the mediumand high-volume vehicles, the inefﬁciencies in the usage of
fuel that result from low speeds remain constantly more
important than the inefﬁciencies of a higher aerodynamic
drag at higher speeds. Note that the shapes of the CO2
emission curves depend on the fuel consumption model
used and the vehicle characteristics assumed. Hill et al.
[39], for example, show truck speed–fuel efﬁciency curves
that differ (at the higher speeds) from those presented in
Fig. 2. While the curves presented by Hill et al. [39] are
similar to the COPERT curves up to 60 km/h, they start
climbing on a rising scale at about 60 km/h to reach their
maximum at 120 km/h. Certainly, the replacement of the
COPERT model by the fuel consumption model used by
Hill et al. [39] will affect the numeric results of the
example case presented below. However, the differences in
the results should be minor because the very high speeds do
not represent the typical daily usage of heavy goods
vehicles, for instance, because of speed limits. This has
been stated by Hill et al. [39] and is in line with the ﬁndings
of this research.
Equation (4) is used to evaluate all transport operations
with CO2 emissions. The latter depend on the vehicle type,
the average travel speed, trip length, and the load factor.
Therefore, the fact is taken into account that different
vehicle types are used for the different transportation ﬂows.
The trip lengths and average travel speeds are requested/
derived from the data delivered by the navigation service
for each trip segment run in the distribution network. Note
that there is one trip segment for the line haul shipments
and (n ? 1) trip segments for the round trips. The load
factors of the production ﬂows and DC-consol shipments
are 68 and 56 %, respectively. The load factors of the DCdirect shipments vary depending on the shipment size (the
average is 48 %). The load factors on the trips connecting
the TSPs and the reference customer are (n 9 tn)/(vehicle
payload capacity) (on average 42 %), the load factors on
the trips connecting the customers in the round trips are
((n 9 tn)/2)/(vehicle payload capacity) (on average 21 %),
and the load factors on the trips connecting the reference
customers and the TSPs are 0 %. Concerning the delivery
trips, the total CO2 emissions of a certain tour are allocated
equally among all shipments that are part of this tour. This
is plausible as the shipments are homogenous in terms of
the distance to the transshipment point and the tonnage.
Clearly, the fact that COPERT bases its CO2 estimations
on the average speed travelled on the single legs may be
seen as a rough estimation of the impact of vehicle speed
on CO2 emissions, especially in the case of stop-and-go
situations [20]. A more precise estimation may be realized

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21

when the exact speed proﬁles, i.e., the speed or energy
consumption per second, of the vehicles that have carried
out the single transport operations are known. In that case,
micro-level emission models may be used, which are based
on instantaneous vehicle kinematic variables, such as speed
and acceleration, or on more aggregated modal variables,
such as time spent in each trafﬁc mode, cruise, and
acceleration [4]. However, such detailed information is
hard to procure for an ex post analysis of several thousand
transport operations and not available ex ante, when evaluating alternative/future transport scenarios. Therefore,
macro-level average-speed emission models have been
developed, which are important tools in a wide-area
emission assessment and which are often used in green
supply chain management studies [4]. According to Barlow
and Boulter [34], who present research that determined the
accuracy of the predictions of different fuel consumption
models, average-speed approaches provide in many scenarios a reasonably accurate characterization of total
emissions from road transport.
3.4 Trafﬁc data acquisition
The trip and trafﬁc information, in terms of tour lengths
and travel times, that is needed as an input for the COPERT
models is retrieved from one of the above-mentioned
online navigation service providers via the available
application programming interface.1 Some online navigation service providers offer the possibility to retrieve trip
information for the desired origin–destination pairs for the
moment of the request or, alternatively, for a speciﬁc
weekday and time of day. In the latter case, the response
contains averaged/smoothed data corresponding to the
typical situation for the selected weekday and time of day,
without exceptional conditions. In order to ensure the
representativeness of the delivered day- and time-typical
travel information, navigation service providers use different statistical techniques [31]. All analyses presented in
this paper are based on day- and time-typical trip information as this is in line with this research’s understanding
of regular trafﬁc congestion.
3.4.1 Free-ﬂow situation
As the selected navigation service provider does not offer
free-ﬂow information, the typical situation for a departure
at 10:30 p.m. is used. This departure time led to the minimum travel time over the day in almost each case in a
sample of 2000 randomly requested origin–destination
pairs. Palmer and Piecyk [40] also found that typically, the
1

The trafﬁc data used in this study are the same as Kellner [26] used

best start times for delivery operations occur just before
midnight or during the early hours of the morning, when
the goal is to minimize the travel time.
3.4.2 Normal trafﬁc situation
The travel time and trip distance information for the normal trafﬁc situation is requested from the online navigation
service for the weekday when the shipment was actually
moved and for the departure time when the different
transport operations typically start.
Concerning the production ﬂows and DC-direct shipments, a great share of these transport operations starts with
vehicle loading activities in the morning. Then, the trips
start. For each transport operation, the assumed departure
time is 8:00 a.m.
Concerning the DC-consol shipments, the normal trafﬁc
situation corresponds to a departure time of 5:00 p.m.
because less-than-truckload shipments are consolidated for
a certain delivery region and typically collected by the
carrier in the late afternoon or early evening hours. In
overnight trunking operations, the consolidated cargo is
moved to the respective transshipment points. There, the
single shipments are prepared for the delivery trips, which
start in the morning hours.
Concerning the delivery trips, ﬁrst, the number of customers and the average tonnage per customer are determined for each calendar day and delivery zone. Then the
trip lengths and the travel times are requested for a
departure time of 8:00 a.m. for the legs between the TSPs
and the reference customers. In doing so, the actual
weekday is considered. The same values are requested for a
departure time of 4:00 p.m. for the return legs from the
reference customers to the TSPs. Concerning the local
trips, trip lengths and travel times are requested for a
sample of customer–customer trips in the considered
delivery zone and on the considered weekday for a
departure time between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and,
then, the average is established. This is also done for the
same legs for a departure time of 10:30 p.m. (free-ﬂow).
Finally, Eqs. (1)–(3) are used to create the delivery trips for
the normal and the hypothetic free-ﬂow situation.

21

4 Understanding the effect of regular trafﬁc
congestion on CO2 emissions
Regular trafﬁc congestion means that there are periodically, depending on the weekday and the time of day,
different trafﬁc conditions on the various segments of the
road network to that of the free-ﬂow situation. This affects
average travel speeds and, eventually, causes altered routes
connecting the origin–destination pairs as the time-minimal
itinerary changes. Figure 3 shows the effect on the CO2
emissions of the line haul shipments and the round trips
when the average travel speed is increased from the normal
to the free-ﬂow situation.
The following subsections explain the development of
CO2 relevant characteristics of the line haul shipments and
round trips with increasing/decreasing average travel
speeds. These explanations are generally applicable; however, the orders of magnitude of the effects (cf. vertical axis
in Fig. 3) depend on the speciﬁc trip parameters. In the
interests of simpliﬁcation, the following explanations
ignore the fact that the routes/trip distances may change
due to bypasses of congested regions.
4.1 Effects of average travel speed changes
on the line haul shipments
Figure 3a shows that within a reasonable range of speed
increases (decreases), CO2 emissions from line haul shipments decrease (increase) approximately linearly. The lines
reproducing the CO2 emissions of an articulated HGV
34–40 tons in Fig. 2 support this ﬁnding: If, for any load
factor and trip length, any (free-ﬂow) speed is reduced
within a reasonable range, then the effect on CO2 emissions
is approximately linear. Even if the average free-ﬂow speed
on a trip is reduced from 85 to 28 km/h (reduction factor
3), the curve in Fig. 2 comes still with an R2 value of 0.91.
This ﬁnding suggests that the overall effect of travel time
increases due to trafﬁc congestion on the CO2 emissions of
the distribution network may be linearly extrapolated (see
below).
4.2 Effects of average travel speed changes
on the round trips

3.4.3 Estimating HGV travel times
As the selected navigation service provider only offers trip
information for passenger cars but not for HGVs, HGV
travel times tHGV (in seconds) are approximated using trip
length l (in meters) and passenger car travel time tCar (in
seconds), as proposed by Kellner [26]:
tHGV ¼ 54:57ðsÞ þ 0:02 Â l þ 1:09 Â tCar

ð5Þ

Figure 3b shows CO2 relevant effects of changing average
travel speeds for the round trips. In the round trip case,
three situations may occur [26]:
1.

Under free-ﬂow and normal conditions, the number of
customers is determined by the vehicle capacity. This
case can be observed when there are mainly highvolume shipments or when the customers served are


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21
25%

Development of tour characteristics with increasing average travel speed

Development of tour characteristics with increasing average travel speed

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
normal

90%

80%

normal

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

free-flow

-5%

-10%

-15%

0%

70%

Average travel speed

free-flow

Average travel speed
Number of stops
CO2 emissions per shipment

Tour length

CO2 per tour

Travel time

CO2 per shipment

a Line haul shipments

Travel time

b Round trips

Fig. 3 Effects of average travel speed changes on the line haul shipments and the round trips

2.

located near to each other, like in city regions. In this
case, the number of tour stops and the itinerary (tour
length) are independent of travel time. Trafﬁc congestion increases the tour travel time and decreases the
average travel speed, as in the case of the line haul
shipments. This development corresponds in Fig. 3b to
the section between ‘60 %’ and ‘free-ﬂow’ and is
equivalent to the development in the line haul
shipment case.
Under free-ﬂow and normal conditions, the number of
tour stops is determined by the time restriction. This
case can be observed when there are mainly lowvolume shipments and/or when the delivery zones are
broad, like in rural regions. The development of the
characteristics of these tours is reproduced in Fig. 3b,
section between ‘normal’ and ‘60 %.’
Three effects are relevant for the volume of CO2
emissions when the number of tour stops is determined
by the time restriction: (A) On the one hand, there will be a
reduction of the CO2 emissions on the single tour legs
when the average travel speed increases as the emissions
per kilometer decrease (cf. Fig. 2). (B) On the other hand,
when the travel times on the single legs are reduced as a
result of average travel speed increases and the number of
customers served in the trip is still determined by the time
constraint, more customers will be inserted in the trip.
When the number of customers increases due to travel

123

3.

time decreases, the tour length will also increase (cf.
Eq. 2). This will boost the volume of CO2 emissions of
the tour. (C) When there are more customers served per
tour, the load factor is increased, which will also increase
the CO2 emission of the round trip. When these three
effects are combined, the volume of CO2 per trip may rise
or fall when the average travel speed increases.
However, when there are more customers in a delivery
round, less delivery trips are necessary to serve all
customers and the average CO2 emissions per tour stop
will drop. Various parameter conﬁgurations for Capa, tn,
s, dA, dR, dL, vA, vR, vL, and the vehicle type have been
tested to ﬁnd situations where the volume of CO2 per
customer does not decrease with rising average travel
speeds. There are very few instances with extreme
parameter conﬁgurations that lead to an increase in the
CO2 per tour stop when the average travel speed
increases. Most of them are less relevant for the following
analyses as they do not represent the ‘typical’ round trip.
Thus, for the major part of the round trips, CO2 emissions
per customer will drop when travel speed increases, as it is
shown in Fig. 3b.
Due to trafﬁc congestion, the number of tour stops is
no longer limited by vehicle capacity, but the time
restriction becomes decisive. Figure 3b visualizes this
situation (starting from the 60 % mark, the travel time

5 Results for the example case
5.1 Overall results of the company case study
For each transport operation, the CO2 emissions and other
indicators have been calculated for the normal and the freeﬂow trafﬁc situation, to be ﬁnally aggregated. Table 2
shows the increase in CO2 emissions and in distance
travelled and the changes in the average travel speed for
the normal compared to the free-ﬂow situation for the
whole distribution network.
The CO2 emissions that arise for the distribution of the
340,000 tons of FMCG are for the normal trafﬁc situation
between 10,566 and 12,535 tons, depending on the number
of DCs. The CO2 volume decreases with a rising number of
DCs as the sum of all kilometers travelled to distribute the
goods decreases [41], here from 15.7 to 13.2 mio
kilometers.
In the networks with more than one distribution center,
regular trafﬁc congestion increases the total CO2 emissions
by about 2.5 %, regardless of the number and locations of
DCs. This indicates a stable effect. This, in turn, implicates
that the absolute effect is lower in a multi-DC structure
compared to a single-DC network as CO2 emissions are
typically lower when there are more DCs [42]. The high
increase in CO2 emissions and distance travelled for the
production ﬂows in the 1-DC network stems from the fact
that the transport operations originating at the factory with

21

the highest output take relatively long detours in the
morning hours to avoid congested roads. This also explains
why the average travel speed is even higher in the normal
than in the free-ﬂow situation: More kilometers are travelled to avoid the congested areas, and these detours allow
higher average speeds compared to the free-ﬂow trip. In
light of this, the impact of trafﬁc congestion on the CO2
emissions is relatively homogenous. The CO2 increase is
highest for the delivery trips (?4.2 %), which takes into
account detours of congested roads, the reduction of customers served per tour, and additional delivery trips needed. This observation may be explained by the fact that the
delivery trips experience with a minus of six percent the
highest decrease in average travel speed. This, in turn, is
plausible as there are many customer–customer legs in city
regions, where trafﬁc congestion is especially hurting the
efﬁciency of the transport operations, whereas the longdistance line haul operations often use motorways and
primary roads. Note that, in the case of the delivery trips,
the CO2 increase is the same for all network conﬁgurations
because changing the number of DCs only changes the
production ﬂows, the DC-direct shipments, and the DCconsol shipments; however, this does not alter the delivery
trips [26]. Even if there are some TSPs that are supplied by
more than one distribution center because the different
retailers in these TSP service areas are assigned to different
DCs, the delivery trips will not alter because each customer
is supplied on a given delivery day via the nearest TSP.

Table 2 Aggregated effects of regular trafﬁc congestion on the CO2 emissions, on the kilometers travelled, and on the average travel speed of
the transportation ﬂows
Indicator
CO2 emissions

Transportation ﬂows

1 DC

2 DCs

3 DCs

4 DCs

Production ﬂows (%)

13.1

3.2

2.5

2.4

DC-direct shipments (%)

2.0

2.1

2.0

2.0

DC-consol shipments (%)

1.3

1.5

1.4

1.5

Delivery trips (%)

4.2

4.2

4.2

4.2

Total (%)

4.5

2.6

2.4

2.4

Total: normal situation (tons)
Km travelled

12,535

11,395

10,719

10,566

Increase free-ﬂow to normal (tons)
Production ﬂows (%)

535
15.2

288
0.7

253
0.2

248
0.3

DC-direct shipments (%)

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.1

DC-consol shipments (%)

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.1

Delivery trips (%)

2.4

2.4

2.4

2.4

Total (%)

3.2

0.7

0.7

0.7

Total: normal situation (km)

15.7 9 106

Increase free-ﬂow to normal (km)
Avg. travel speed

488 9 10

3

14.3 9 106
99 9 10

3

13.4 9 106
3

13.2 9 106

87 9 10

85 9 103

Production ﬂows (%)

7.3

-5.8

-5.1

-4.9

DC-direct shipments (%)

-4.9

-5.4

-4.8

-5.0

DC-consol shipments (%)

-3.4

-4.0

-3.6

-4.0

Delivery trips (%)

-6.0

-6.0

-6.0

-6.0


5.2 Delivery trips
The relatively high impact of trafﬁc congestion on the CO2
efﬁciency of the delivery trips may also be explained with
the trafﬁc effect on the total kilometers travelled. On the
one hand, trafﬁc congestion causes additional kilometers
travelled because of detours avoiding congested regions.
On the other hand, additional delivery trips are occasionally needed to supply the customers (76 extra tours are only
due to trafﬁc congestion). The average number of customers served per trip is 6.73 in the free-ﬂow and 6.45 in
the normal situation (-4.2 %). And the share of the
delivery tours limited by the time constraint increases from
51.2 to 53.3 % [26].
The change in CO2 emissions on a single shipment basis
is between -37.8 and ?54.8 %. The average is ?4.2 %.
For 1.85 % of the round trip shipments, trafﬁc congestion
leads to a reduction of the CO2 volume emitted and for
98.15 % to an increase. CO2 reductions of about 30 % are
observed when a ‘Rigid 20–26 tons’ vehicle is used in the
free-ﬂow situation with a low load factor and, due to a
reduction of the number of customers in the round trip as a
consequence of travel time increases, a ‘Rigid 7.5–12 tons’
vehicle is used under normal conditions. This observation
indicates the major importance of choosing the right
vehicle to move the shipments. Moreover, there are slight
CO2 reductions (below 1 %) for about 0.13 % of all
delivery shipments because for these shipments the itinerary is shorter in the normal situation where congested roads
are avoided than in the free-ﬂow case.
5.3 Line haul shipments
For the line haul shipments, the CO2 increase on a single
shipment basis is for the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-DC conﬁgurations
at maximum 43.4, 23.4, 41.4, and 41.4 %. The average is
about 2.5 %. For about 0.5 % of all line haul shipments,
the CO2 emissions are reduced as a result of trafﬁc congestion. These are shipments for which the routes have
been changed to avoid the congested roads and the changed
itinerary is shorter than the one in the free-ﬂow situation.
The emissions are reduced when the CO2 savings that
come with saved distance travelled are greater than the
CO2 emissions caused by the travel speed reductions.
Overall, the effect of trafﬁc congestion on distance
travelled is relatively low in percentage values (Table 2).
Bypassing congested roads causes a slight increase in
kilometers travelled [26].
Furthermore, the results prove that the time of departure
of the transport operations signiﬁcantly affects the average
travel speed and the CO2 volume.2 DC-consol shipments
are less affected by trafﬁc congestion because these
transport operations are carried out during the nighttime.

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21

The CO2 increase that is due to regular trafﬁc congestion is
about 50 % higher in the case of the production ﬂows and
the DC-direct shipments when compared to the DC-consol
operations. This means that the amount of CO2 of the
distribution network may be reduced when transport
operations are shifted to the nighttime hours. Whereas this
measure is difﬁcult to implement for the DC-direct shipments—these deliveries depend on the opening hours of
the retailers—shifting (at least a share of) the production
ﬂows from the day- to the nighttime is less problematical.
5.4 Effects of further travel time increases
This section summarizes the results of a linear regression
analysis intended to extrapolate the impact of further
increases of trafﬁc delays on the CO2 emissions from
transportation. In this analysis, it is assumed that the effect
of increasing/decreasing trafﬁc delays on the CO2 emissions of the distribution networks is (approximately) linear.
Trafﬁc delays are deﬁned as the normal travel time minus
the free-ﬂow time.
The trafﬁc delays have been separately measured on the
different tour segments that are driven throughout the
distribution network because there are different levels of
trafﬁc congestion on the single transport legs. Then, for all
tour segments, the individual delays are increased by a
constant factor d from 1.0 up to 3.0 with step size 0.1. This
is done for the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-DC conﬁguration, which
leads to 84 observations. These 84 observations serve as
the data input for the regression analysis: The CO2 emissions are the dependent variable, and the values for d and
the (inverted) number of DCs are the independent variables. Equation (6) presents the model. Total CO2 are the
total CO2 emissions (in tons), d is the factor by which the
delays are increased, and (1/Number of DCs) is the
inverted number of DCs.
Total CO2 ¼ 9600ðtonsÞ þ 260 Â d þ 2770
1
Â
Number of DCs

ð6Þ

The regression analysis indicates that the total CO2
volume may be explained to a good extent by the linear
model: R2 = 98.7 %, MAPE = 0.7 %, the maximum
deviation of the estimated from the observed CO2 emissions is 1.3 %, and all coefﬁcients have p values below
0.001. According to Eq. (6), a doubling of the delays on the
single legs will boost the CO2 emissions by 260 tons—
regardless of the number of DCs. This means that the CO2
increase in percentage values is higher in networks with
more distribution centers and that the CO2 advantage of a
2

This ﬁnding is in line with the research results presented by Palmer
with rising delays. On average, a doubling of the delays on
all legs increases the total CO2 emissions by about 2.3 %.
This effect may be linearly extrapolated, which means that
an increase of the delays by 20 % will boost the total CO2
emissions by 0.46 %, for instance.
5.5 CO2 mitigating opportunities
Apart from observing the effect of a rising number of DCs
on the CO2 emissions from trafﬁc congestion, the presented
network model and data source enable the designers and
the operators of the logistics network to evaluate additional
strategies aimed at reducing the CO2 intensity of the distribution activities. In an analogous manner to the analysis
of the effect of rising numbers of DCs, the effects of
changing the network structure by altering the number of
TSPs could be analyzed.
For the actual 1-DC conﬁguration, two sensitivities are
studied: First, the effect of shifting 30 % of the shipments
starting at the factory with the highest output to 10:30 p.m.
departure times is observed. Second, the effect of only
using ‘Rigid 20–26 tons’ vehicles—instead of a mix of
‘Rigid 7.5–12 tons’ and ‘Rigid 20–26 tons’—for carrying
out the delivery trips is calculated. The ﬁrst option leads to
a reduction of 2.9 % of CO2 emissions for the production
ﬂows. The second option leads to a plus of 10.2 % in CO2
emissions of the delivery shipments, indicating the major
importance of selecting the right vehicle to carry out the
round trips.

6 Conclusion
6.1 Summary of the ﬁndings
This research presented an approach to quantify the effect
of regular trafﬁc congestion on the CO2 emissions of a
typical FMCG distribution network. In the example case,
regular trafﬁc congestion causes about 2.5 % of the total
CO2 emissions. The number of DCs affects this percentage
to a minor degree. However, the trafﬁc effect on CO2
volumes in absolute values declines when the number of
DCs increases. The outcomes of the regression analysis
indicate that within a certain range, the impact of
increasing trafﬁc delays on total CO2 emissions may be
approximated with a linear model. That means that when
all trafﬁc delays will rise by 10 %, the CO2 emissions are
expected to rise by 0.25 %. For some line haul shipments
and round trip shipments, CO2 increases of more than 40
and 50 % have been observed. However, the average
increases are below 5 %. Whereas the effect of trafﬁc
congestion on the CO2 emissions of the line haul shipments

Page 13 of 15

21

are—apart from some detour kilometers—essentially due
to lower average travel speeds, which cause inefﬁciencies
in the usage of fuel, the characteristics of the round trips—
in terms of kilometers travelled, number of customers
served, total trips needed, load factors—may change
completely due to lower average travel speeds, which
affects the CO2 footprint of the distribution network. The
volume of CO2 emissions may be reduced, for instance, by
shifting transport operations to the nighttime hours or by
choosing the right vehicle for carrying out the delivery
trips.
This study demonstrates that using trafﬁc data provided
by online navigation services allows monitoring the effect
of regular trafﬁc congestion on the CO2 performance of a
whole distribution network. Independent of the GHG
aspect, this article shows that using this data source allows
basing logistics system analyses on area-wide representative trip data, taking time-typical trafﬁc conditions and
their consequences (travel time changes, re-routing decisions) into account. Considering the discussion of the different road trafﬁc data sources in Sect. 2.3, it becomes
obvious that the use of one of the conventional trafﬁc data
sources would have posed problems in the ﬁelds of representativeness, area-wide geographical coverage, and/or in
the consistency and completeness of measurements.
6.2 Generalizability of the results
Of course, the generalizability of the results requires conﬁrmation through the analysis of more cases because the
example case certainly does not represent the situation of
all SIC-20 manufacturers. The fact alone that the positions
of the different facilities affect the degree to which the ﬁrm
is exposed to trafﬁc congestion causes generalizability
concerns.
Concerning the case company, however, it is recognized
as a representative SIC-20 ﬁrm in terms of the customers
served, its product portfolio, the shipment sizes and
delivery frequencies, and the ﬂow of materials. Generally,
the studied case allows for a good representation of FMCG
distribution in Germany because the analyzed shipment
data include a great share of the German retailer locations;
this allows for a nationwide observation of trafﬁc conditions. In addition, the impact of trafﬁc congestion has been
observed for the cost-minimal 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-DC conﬁgurations. Thus, in principle, four distinct network
structures have been investigated. And, as has been
demonstrated, the impact of trafﬁc congestion did not differ
a lot in relative values across the four networks. Moreover,
the results for the delivery trips do not depend on the
facility locations of the manufacturer, but on the positions
of the TSPs and the retailers. Both are independent of the
manufacturer and part of many supply chains [26].


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:21

6.3 Further research
Future research may analyze more logistics networks in
order to generalize the results. Furthermore, the network
model and the data source may be combined to observe the
effects of travel time variability and/or for a continuous
monitoring of the transport system in order to learn how
GHG emissions develop over a longer period. In addition,
future research may use navigation service data to analyze
additional CO2 cutting opportunities more in detail. These
might include green route planning taking time-typical
travel times into account, the analysis of the CO2 effect of
postponing vehicle departure times, changing the delivery
day, or the analysis of region-speciﬁc differences in travel
times and CO2 emissions.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.
18.


