
INTRODUCTION

Globalization is a concept full of meanings in economic literature, practically is understood as
a symbol of wealth, an important engine that moved all productive sectors to another level. These
kind of changes brought by this phenomenon have been felt in the economical, political, social and
technological system. Although the world continues to evolve, technology seems to be the most
highlighted factor in scientific studies. Now, we are facing a world with sophisticated machines,
important solution that could cure diseases and also who could support the pharmaceutical industry,
there are virtual instruments which can easily erase distances and approach individuals, there are
microchips and miniature intelligence which are covering the most competitive corporations of the
world and so on. The finance and the economic channels have undergone many changes over time.
Leaving aside historical forms of payment, such as gold, silver, jewels and so on, the paper was
quickly assimilated by the market. Can we leave behind the paper in exchange of electronic currency?
At first, the paper money was an invention of the Chinese people to simplify the transport of values
between regions and also to eliminate the risk regarding theft or dishonesty. Now, it's seems that
paper money has become a traditional way of exchange, while the electronic currency became a much
more attractive system.
Nowadays individuals found more useful and handy to receive money through credit card or to
conduct online payments. Credit card payment was introduced for the very first time in 1920 USA,
to sell fuel to automobile owners. Being so useful, in 1938 more USA companies began to accept
each other credit cards. Also, the first credit card with similar mechanism of our days, was released
only in 1958. Indeed, the credit card is considered a helpful banking product, which is preferred by
everyone because of its benefits, such as:


the revolving credit line;



the safety element;



to flexible repayment and discount possibility;



shopping bonuses etc.
In time, individuals found that its more useful to realize direct payments through E-POS

(Electronic Point of Sale) or Imprinter, to shop online or to withdraw money from ATM`s (Automated
Teller Machine).
Until recently, the term “virtual currency" was not very reliable. Many countries considered
this kind of coin as an illegal commodity, and because of that, measures were taken to curb its usage.
However, there a few numbers of countries that simply allowed it, countries like Canada, Germany,
Finland, Switzerland and so on. 15 years ago the virtual market was a market of casino chips or flyer
miles. Efforts have been made to launch this new system, the first platform being the eCash system,
but at the end it has proved to be disappointing. Despite this, it followed a period of important
currency innovation and expansion. According to economic literature it seems that the virtual money
economy is now larger than the economies of many real countries (Castronova, 2014, p.13).
Because we are living among a new era of language and communication, the payment system
relied on this aspect, allowing people to trade products, services in a quick, easy and safe manner.
For some economists, virtual currencies may be the next step after paper money. Although is found
under different names, the digital value transfer can be defined as an electronic payment system which
1. “VIRTUAL CURRENCY” DEFINITION

Although this period is characterized by the existence of virtual currency, this term is not a new
one. Virtual currency continues to maintain the main features of traditional currency, in other words
virtual money are a symbol or synonym for a value, a payment system technology which continued
to grow over the past 20 years. Virtual currency is based on the idea of exchanging value without the
approval of an institution. When is difficult to manage paper money, in an exchange of a transaction
fee, virtual currencies could be an option to transfer in a quick manner value between parties.
Digital or virtual currency define an emerging market, which strengthens the payment
landscape. Users or consumers have the possibility to earn points or rewards that can turn at any time
in cash. Many international organizations tried to define virtual currencies. For example, the
European Central Bank argue that virtual money is a type of decentralized digital money, issued and
controlled by its developers, an exchange form of value accepted in virtual community. The U.S.
Department of Treasury found digital money as a medium of exchange similar with currency
attributes in virtual environments, but not the same with real currency. This concept was developed
in parallel with social gaming and the industry of online games.
Recent studies argue that between virtual currency and digital currency, are some differences.
Digital currency is again a way of payment that is electronically created and stored. For example,
Bitcoin is considered to be a digital currency.
The virtual landscape presents a new area such as:


mobile apps and online and network games has raised attention of online tokens, or virtual
coins, which can simply be earned by completing games levels or different kind of tasks. The
proliferation of virtual coins are not limited only to network games, this phenomenon evolved
inside advertisements segment (TV shows, movie downloads and so on).



the increase popularity of peer-to-peer currencies. Bitcoin became well-known in 2009,
because was easier to use than traditionally banking system, encouraging the mining process
through its users. It can be controlled among its users, and it is not managed at all by a central
authority.



new types of payments through mobile phones. The proliferation of technology in
smarthphone industry has brought new payment schemes. Overall, the mechanism is very
simple, merchants are rewarding consumers with tokens, if they use their mobile phones to


virtual payment landscape is now more and more diversified. Today, airline passenger could
access credits of air miles, as a form of compensation. Similar, mobile applications can
generate virtual coins or tokens.

2. TYPES OF VIRTUAL CURRENCIES

Recent literature argue that virtual currencies can be found into two distinct categories:


mature virtual currencies (coupons, air miles, loyalty points etc.);



new or recently virtual currencies (apps which could generate coins and tokens, mobile
coupons, bitcoins etc.)

3. SIZE OF VIRTUAL CURRENCY MARKET

According to a research organization named Yankee Group, digital currency market assumes a
constant growth rate. Only in 2012, this market have been worth around U.S. $ 47.5 billion and it is
estimated that in 2017 will continue to grow up to U.S. $55.4 billion (McKee, 2013, p.3). Despite the
fact that mature virtual currencies influences much more this market than the recently or up-andcoming virtual currencies, the new one forms of digital payment will make a profound impact in the
next few years.
Figure 1 - Virtual currency market growth (2012-2017)


According to figure 1, retail loyalty points will have a significant increase, summarizing the
period of 2012-2017. However, digital currency like Bitcoin, will continue to work for a period, to
gain confidence and to combat the volatility disadvantage.

4. A NEW DIGITAL CURRENCY - BITCOIN
Bitcoin represents a new monetary system, an easy way to send and receive money which is
also affordable for any computer user. Essentially, Bitcoin is a new payment system based on
cryptography system. Its main features are: peer-to-peer system, a digital and decentralized coin used
in virtual environments, which can make possible the exchange into US dollars or other currencies.
Overall, this digital currency is primarily a code used for sending and receiving money online. There
is no institution or central bank who is in charge with bitcoin creation or its administration, users are
the only individuals who are able to control such kind of currency.
Bitcoin is based on pseudonymous features. All bitcoin transactions are registered in a open
database named Blockchain. Blockchain is a mechanism which provides the anonymity source.
The inventor of Bitcoin is Satoshi Nakamoto, known as a mysterious hacker, who created this
digital coin in 2009. Satoshi has developed the first software who emphasized the mining process or
the process of creating Bitcoin. BTC`s are stored in bitcoin wallets, that borrows the same qualities
of an account. The first set of bitcoin was named Genesis block. Shortly after this, in 2010 the
international community could use for the first time, this digital coin. In May 2010, a bitcoin user
could buy a pizza worth $25 in exchange of 10.000 BTC.
Soon after its introduction, BTC began to grow rapidly attempting to become a currency,
increasing media attention. New online pages and companies began to cover bitcoin transactions.
This coin has drawn the attention even of criminal structures. “The Silk Road” a hidden website
allowed users to buy and sell illegal merchandise - mostly drugs, using bitcoin for security and
anonymity (Patterson, 2013). At this point, this is a huge disadvantage that BTC could become a
channel for illegal activities (drug trafficking, gambling, money laundering). Such examples are
offered by other virtual currencies, like e-Gold or WebMoney. Bitcoin is currently accepted as a form
of payment at hundreds of legitimate retailers including vendors selling clothing, games, music, and
some hotels and restaurants (FBI, 2012).
The main characteristics of bitcoin payments are:




electronic payments are confirmed in very short time;



because of limited production of bitcoins (21 million) there is a low risk of monetary inflation;



there is a low risk of payment fraud, considering that the transactions are irreversible;



there is no need of identification;
In Europe, bitcoin has grown rapidly. For example, Germany recognized bitcoin for legal and

tax purposes, under the name of “currency unit” and “”private money”. The first trading platform for
bitcoins in Europe, with direct cooperation of a bank regulated by the Financial Supervisory Authority
was set in Germany (RT, 2013). According to international reports, Germany, Finland, Singapore and
Canada are among those countries that have issued tax guidance on Bitcoin, while Ireland, Israel and
Slovenia have made gestures that they plan to (Hill, 2014).

CONCLUSIONS

Taking into consideration the widespread of technology, the Internet applications and mobile
phones, virtual currencies are becoming more and more relevant in the consumer lives. The
international companies dealing with smartphones selling, encouraged this market to increase,
allowing a rapid transformation in the nature of financial digital world. Along with the appearance of
Bitcoin many governments are trying to implement a regulatory system, to eliminate the
competitiveness with national currency and also to ensure a security policy, designed to protect users
against money laundering, theft, and other type of illegal activities such as drug trafficking, gambling
and so on. Looking forward, virtual currencies are a part of an emerging market, which encourage
both investment and risk. With proper regulatory policies, the world of digital currency can be
considered a success also for governments and its users.

REFERENCES

Castronova, E. (2014) Wildcat Currency. How the virtual money revolution is transforming the
economy,

Library

of

Congress

Cataloging,

USA,

retrieved

from

FBI (2012) Unique Features Present Distinct Challenges for Deterring Illicit Activity, retrieved from
http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/threatlevel/2012/05/Bitcoin-FBI.pdf
Hill, K. (2014) Bitcoin`s Legality Around the World, Forbes, 31 January, retrieved from
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2014/01/31/bitcoins-legality-around-the-world/
McKee, J. (2013) Redefining Virtual Currency, Yankee 451 Group, LLC, retrieved from
http://info.tapjoy.com/wpcontent/uploads/sites/4/2013/05/RedefiningVirtualCurrency_WhitePaper-1MAY2013-v1.pdf
Patterson, S. (2013) Bitcoin Beginner: A step by step guide to buying, selling and investing in bitcoins,
Better Life Publishers, retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/Bitcoin-Beginner-SellingInvesting-Bitcoins-ebook/dp/B00DKLZLB4/ref=sr_1_1?s=digitaltext&ie=UTF8&qid=1401559640&sr=1-1&keywords=bitcoin
RT (2013) Germany recognizes Bitcoin as ,,private money", 18 August, retrieved from
