
1 Introduction
Mass customization has replaced or supplemented mass
production in many parts of the world [1]. The main focus
of this production system is to meet the individual customer demand with minimal loss of efﬁciency [2]. Thus, it
demands very sophisticated linkages. Since customer and
buyer rely on each other to create the desired product, mass
customization demands two-way communications (from
buyer to producer and from producer to buyer) instead of
one-way communication (only from producer to buyer) [3].
The communication between producer and buyer is mainly
achieved through the sales process. Under mass customization, the latter is involved in a lot of processes, i.e.,
picking choices, opting service, ﬁlling forms. If the sales
process fails to transfer customer’s idea to the producer or
it further confuses the person, then the success of mass
customization is at stake. Hence, the efﬁciency of the sales
process is of vital importance in the mass customization.
In modern times, the automotive industry has propelled
rapidly toward mass customization. If we consider producer–
buyer linkage within the automotive industry, we recognize
that customer to producer interaction is more complicated
here. Automotive is usually bought through a dealer, and
customers rarely want to order their car online. So the dealer
has to explain the options, the possible combinations and the
different packages available to the customers. Thus, the sales
process becomes much more complicated for the dealer as
they are the main messengers between the producer and the
buyer. It is very important that they are trained properly to
guide customers during the buying process. Another aspect of
the sales process in the automotive industry is that customizing a car also takes time as many steps, e.g., painting,
assembling and delivering processes are according to customer choices. Hence, it requires time which may lead to the


decrease in the satisfaction of the customer. All these factors
demonstrate that adoption of mass customization is much
more complex in the automotive industry than in other small
products industries [4]. However, despite all these challenges,
many automotive companies adopted mass customization
quite successfully.
Since mass customization complicates the sales process
for automotive companies, it is important to investigate
whether the automotive companies have modiﬁed the sales
process according to the needs of mass customization or not.
As here exists no such study, we investigate the association
between mass customization and sales process efﬁciency for
two leading automotive companies (which are quite successful in the adoption of mass customization) and evaluate
that whether they are also successful in the modiﬁcation of
the sales process. To address the problem in more detail, we
analyze the existing literature in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we
investigate the problem through a statistical investigation of
two automotive companies. In Sect. 4, we discuss the results
of the statistical calculations. Last, we conclude our work
and give an outlook on future studies in Sect. 5.

2 Literature analysis
Although mass customization provides customer with large
number of varieties, this does not automatically generate an
added value for the customer [5]. It is observed that high
level of options offered to customer may confuse him
instead of increasing his satisfaction. It may also lead to the
production of the product which is not desired by the
customer [6]. Moreover, it is investigated that the relationship between numbers of choices offered and perceived
satisfaction can be bidirectional. Customers can be overwhelmed by the high number of choices while in some
cases it is found that customer may ﬁnd large assortments
as frustrating [7]. Selection process can be complicated
long, and customer might experience an uncertainty. Sales
management is one of the tools to get customer out of this
frustration and uncertainty, and it should be designed to
simplify the relation between customer and producer [8]. In
other words, we can say that mass customization requires
customized marketing strategies. It needs sophisticated
changes in the sales process which should be focused to
comfort customer during conﬁguration process, and mass
customization is thought to be a step toward realization of
mass customization [9]. There are many literatures which
emphasize on the different production strategies under
mass customization. However, research on how customers
will co-design with producer is very rare [8]. Companies
claim to produce thousands of different products under
mass customization, but the question arises that do these
companies translate their ability to produce thousands of

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:17

products into shopping and purchasing attitude of customer. Thus, in the current study, the main focus is to
investigate customer satisfaction perceived from the sales
processes, while the adoption of mass customization. To
make our analysis more speciﬁc, we are addressing this
issue for the automotive industry.
By considering mass customization under automotive
industry, we ﬁgured out that relation between producer and
buyer becomes more complex here. The main reason is that
in the automotive industry, this relation is distorted by the
third party ‘‘dealer’’. Since the relation is not direct, it
needs sophistication. Moreover, since it takes time and
complexities to produce a car, so in-time delivery also
becomes a problem. Thus, various such factors, e.g.,
dealers, dealership facility, selling management, delivery
time, complicate the sales procedure [4]. It is also investigated that different e-services (which include different
online services of ordering, complaining, conﬁguring, etc.)
could be used to facilitate customer in mass customization
process. [10]. However, in the case of automotive customers, it is observed that customer relies more on dealer
as compared to these e-services [11]. So customer value
achievement under mass customization in automotive
industry is of greater concern [4].
Importance of customer satisfaction from sales process
for the automotive industry has been emphasized in the
literature also [12]. There is a study about Portugal that
reveals different factors behind customer satisfaction for
automotive industry. It investigates the relation between
producer and customer via qualitative analysis, for three
automotive companies: Toyota, Ford and Renault. It
emphasizes that selling behavior, supportiveness provided,
after sales services and perceived quality have a signiﬁcant
role toward customer satisfaction [12]. Sales strategies
should be given importance to make the customer more
satisﬁed. It should not be ignored that the producer to buyer
interaction is one of the major concerns of the supply
chain; this part has an important role in the achievement of
getting higher customer value and has got a signiﬁcant
place in the modern supply chain [13]. Moreover, it should
also be noted that mass customization has given different
results to different companies. Volkswagen claims to save
$1.7 billion annually [14], while Opel lost $747 million in
2011 [15]. This is due to different operational strategies
[4]. So, sales modiﬁcations for automotive industry under
mass customization are a matter of concern.
The above-mentioned arguments lead to a question that
whether in the automotive industry has the sales process
been modiﬁed according to the needs of mass customization. If we look into the literature, we cannot ﬁnd any study
which speciﬁcally deals with this issue. The purpose of this
paper is to ﬁll this literature gap. Our focus will be to

producer–buyer relationship in downstream supply chain.
Hence, we will investigate whether modiﬁcations adopted
by car companies are sufﬁcient to meet the challenges of
mass customization or not.

3 Methodology
To address the research problem, we are taking two cases
from the automotive companies. The selected companies
have adopted mass customization successfully, and this
will help us to ﬁgure out that whether the companies also
focused on the modiﬁcation of downstream supply chain.
Our focus will be on the quantitative analysis. First, we ﬁx
measures for the satisfaction of customer regarding the
buying process and for the mass customization itself. Based
on these data, we perform a statistical analysis.
3.1 Data analysis
In the current study, we have chosen to analyze the data for
US automotive customers of BMW and Mercedes-Benz
from 2008 till 2015.
3.1.1 Measuring the extent of mass customization
Mass customization can be measured by investigating the
number of available options. Automotive companies are
providing different options to customers for tailoring their
products. However, for a customer, the selection of
advanced options like driver assistance package and different sports packages is much more difﬁcult than color
selections. So, most automotive companies provide yes/no
options for advanced packages, while for the upholstery,
trim and exterior colors different choices have to be opted.
The measure of the extent of customization is called cus-

Buyers

options for wheel, x5 = no of individual options available,
x6 = no of additional packages, x7 = no. of steering wheel
options.
For both of the selected companies, customers are
allowed to customize the car through phenomena known as
‘‘Build your own car’’. We evaluated CE for different
models of each company, i.e., for Mercedes-Benz the
evaluated models are C class, E class, G class, Cls class
and S class, while for BMW series 7, 6, 3 and 1 are used. It
is found that for each company in each year, customization
options are almost same for all models. However, to get
more valid results, we evaluated CE for every model separately and took the averages to get the ﬁnal values, shown
in Table 1 in ‘‘Appendix’’.
3.1.2 Satisfaction perceived by the customer
To measure customer satisfaction regarding the sales process, we follow the approach introduced in the J.D. Power
studies [16]. There, the authors constructed a number of
indicators, which describe different aspects of automotive
companies.
One of the signiﬁcant indexes developed by the study is
sales satisfaction index (SSI), which gives a comprehensive
analysis of the new-vehicle purchase experience from the
customer perspective response with respect to purchase,
delivery, sales and price. We employ the SSI index to
measure for satisfaction given two different categories:
buyers (who ultimately buy the product) and rejecters (who
due to some of the reason leave the product). In accordance
with the J.D. Power studies, we utilized a weight of 51 %
for buyers and 49 % for rejecters [16] to compute SSI for
US automotive customers via the formula shown in Eq. 2.
Since SSI is constructed by using a large amount of data, it
allows to generate a meaningful picture of customer satisfaction regarding the sales process.

Rejecter

zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
SSI ¼ f ðWorking out of deal; Delivery process; Dealership facility; sales person; Price Fairness; Facility; Inventory; Experience NegotiationsÞ

ð2Þ

tomization extent (CE). It is comprised of the number of
options available for trim, paint, packages, upholstery,
wheels, etc.
CE ¼

7
Y

xi

ð1Þ

i¼1

where x1 = no. of options for paint, x2 = no. of options
for upholstery, x3 = no. of options for trim, x4 = no of

The weights for subcategories proposed in [16] are given in
Table 2, shown in ‘‘Appendix’’. We like to note that all
variables shown in Table 2 are impacted by mass customization. Since mass customization adds a lot of complexity to the buying process, it demands modern
dealership facilities, informed sales persons and efﬁcient
dealing. Similarly, delivery time is important in the case of
mass customization because cars are mainly assembled
after the placement of the customer’s order.


3.2 Measuring relation between CE and SSI
Data organized for CE and SSI are shown in Table 3, in
‘‘Appendix’’. After getting quantitative data on both indicators for the mentioned companies, we can use statistical
techniques to analyze the relation between the two. To
measure the link between the two variables, we utilized the
Spearman rank correlation [17]. This test is without any
limitations; thus, it can give us meaningful details regarding the interdependency of the variables.
3.2.1 Spearman ranks correlation test
Spearman rank correlation is used to investigate the
strength of the link between two data sets. It is an alternative to linear regression and correlation. There are several advantages of using Spearman rank. Most importantly,
it helps to get rid of outliers. The null and alternative
hypothesis for the test are as follows:

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:17

With the above-mentioned hypothesis, the next task is to
evaluate the T test via the formula:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð4Þ
t ¼ r= ð1 À r 2 Þ=ðn À 2Þ
where r is the Spearman coefﬁcient, calculated from Eq. 3,
and n represents the number of observations for SSI or CE.
The results of the t tests are checked with the help of
rule of thumb for this test, which states that ‘‘If the T value
is greater than |2|, it shows that relation between the two
variables is statistically signiﬁcant, so we can reject the
null hypothesis and vice versa’’ [20]. Rule of thumb is
estimated for a 95 % conﬁdence interval.

4 Results
Utilizing the data and methods from Sect. 3, we obtain the
following results.

H0

There is no relation between two variables

Results from Spearman rank correlation test Source: Authors
calculation

H1

There is relation between two variables

Test

Company

R

T value

Interpretation

Spearman rank
correlation
test

BMW

-0.64

-2.04

Strong and
signiﬁcant
negative relation

MercedesBenz

-0.29

-0.28

Week and
insigniﬁcant
negative relation

The Spearman rank correlation can be calculated with
the help of the following formula:
P
6 di2
r ¼1À
ð3Þ
nð n2 À 1Þ
where we use di ¼ CEi À SSIi , for respective years i and
n represents the number of observations for SSI or CE.
The value of the coefﬁcient ‘‘r’’ ranges from -1 to ?1.
If the value turns out to be zero, we will accept the null
hypothesis, otherwise we reject it. The r value of -1
suggests that the relation is strongly negative, while ?1
suggests that two variables are correlated strongly positive
[18].
3.2.2 Validation of the test results
In statistics, it is important to validate the result obtained
from any test. Here, we apply a signiﬁcance test to determine whether the results obtained from the Spearman rank
correlation regarding the association between mass customization and sales process efﬁciency are valid or not.
Most commonly the T test is used for this purpose [19]. We
apply the T test with the following null and alternative
hypothesis:
H0 There is no correlation between mass customization
and sales efﬁciency in the population
H1 There is correlation between mass customization and
sales efﬁciency in the population

123

As shown in the table, the results from the test are
similar for both companies regarding respective signs but
are different in impact and signiﬁcance. Overall, the results
are negative for both companies. This shows that the correlation between mass customization and satisfaction
regarding the sales process is negative. We cannot say that
the rise in one variable causes decline in other, as correlation does not mean causality. However, we can say that
with the overall rise in mass customization producer–buyer
linkage is weakened. This implies that the sales process is
not modiﬁed according to the needs of the new production
system in both automotive companies.
The results of the two companies are different in
strength and signiﬁcance. In the case of BMW, we observe
that company has a vast program for carrying out mass
customization. The company has developed various
options in design and combination. However, we see that
with the increase in the mass customization, the satisfaction from the sales process has declined signiﬁcantly. There
is a strong negative and signiﬁcant relation between mass
customization and sales process efﬁciency, which shows
that the sales process was not modiﬁed accordingly. The
relation between the mass customization and sales process
efﬁciency. This implies that Mercedes-Benz should also
improve the sales process efﬁciency. However, it must be
noted that the customization program of Mercedes-Benz
has not declined the customer satisfaction from sales process as much as in the case of BMW.
Hence, the above-mentioned results imply that the
modiﬁcation of the sales process is not sufﬁciently elaborated. It should be noted that in calculating SSI, delivery
time has also been taken into account. With the advance in
customization, it becomes difﬁcult to customize the product in time, which causes unrest in the customers. Furthermore, with the increase in delivery time, customer
preference and choices may change leading to decrease in
his level of satisfaction. Another important reason behind
these results can be involvement of the third party. As the
above-mentioned studies are for USA, it must be noted that
most people prefer to buy through a dealer instead of
buying online [18]. The dealer has the responsibility to
read the customers mind and transfer it to a producer. Thus,
if the dealer fails, it results in customer dissatisfaction
regarding the sales process or even in the dissatisfaction
regarding the mass customization.
Moreover, we like to note that these results do not mean
that mass customization is unsuccessful in the mentioned
companies; it might be possible that two companies are
very efﬁcient in the adoption of mass customization from
different prospects; however, the companies have not sufﬁciently modiﬁed the sales process.

5 Conclusion and future outlook
Mass customization attracts customers but at the same
time, it complicates the downstream supply chain. The
main reason for this is that in mass customization the
producer has to read the customer mind, a phenomenon
which inﬂuences the producer–buyer relation. There is
enough literature which shows how production should be
modiﬁed to meet the needs of mass customization. However, the importance of modiﬁcations in the sales procedure
is ignored. The question is raised in this study that whether
in the automotive industry the modiﬁcations carried out in
the sales procedure are enough to meet the requirements of
mass customization.
To investigate this question, we considered the cases of
two automotive companies, BMW and Mercedes-Benz. We
evaluated the quantitative data for the customers of the
USA for both companies from 2008 to 2015. Firstly, we

Page 5 of 7 17

developed an indicator to measure the extent of customization (CE). Secondly, to measure the sales process
efﬁciency, we used the SSI developed by J.D. Power
studies. After organizing data, we used statistical tests to
compute the correlation between customization extent and
efﬁciency in the sales process via the Spearman rank correlation test. Moreover, we applied the T test to check the
signiﬁcance. The results obtained were negative for both
companies which imply that with the increase in mass
customization the efﬁciency in the sales process has
declined, or in other words, producer–buyer linkage has
weakened. However, the results of Mercedes-Benz are
better than of BMW. The former has weak and insigniﬁcant
association between SSI and CE, while the latter has strong
negative and signiﬁcant relation. Yet, both companies need
to consider further modiﬁcations in the sales process.
Literature focuses a lot on modiﬁcations in the production procedure, while there is hardly any study which
brings out the importance of sales management under mass
customization or suggests how sales procedures should be
modiﬁed to meet mass customization challenges. To ﬁll
this gap, this paper brings out that sales procedures modiﬁcations under mass customization should be given signiﬁcant importance. The empirical analysis showed that
automotive companies are not modifying the sales procedures enough to meet customization challenges. Producer
to buyer interaction should be made as simple as possible.
There is need to bring out more sophisticated changes in
sales procedures under mass customization. Many sales
criteria like simple selection process, delays in delivery,
price fairness and dealer’s availability are the areas to focus
on, apart from the different mass customization production
techniques. Moreover, further work can be done to validate
the results of this study through expert interview, analyzing
the above-mentioned variables for forecasting purposes or
using other statistical techniques.