Introduction
Realizing a sustainable society is one of the most challenging problems that humanity faces.
The United Nations has adopted a global framework for international cooperation, the 2030



generations to meet their own needs” [40]. Sustainable development should be seen as a
process that provides humanity with a pathway to survival and living a good life on Earth [4].
In this study, we treat sustainability as an ideal system state and sustainable development as an
on-going process to achieve the ideal [23].
Achieving a sustainable consumption and production (SCP) pattern [38, 39] is an SDG.
Figure 1 indicates that population growth and waste generation are not decoupled in OECD
countries [24]. This trend is the same as the global trend, which includes low-income countries
[13]. Global waste generation in 2100 is estimated to be 2.9 times that in 2010. In the estimate
[13], 72% of global waste generation in 2100 is from East Asia, Asia-Pacific, South Asia, the
Middle East, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Realizing an SCP pattern for developed
countries and developing countries is critical for global sustainability.
To achieve an SCP pattern, it is necessary to consider reducing the environmental load
caused by production and manufacturing and sufficiency or quality of life (QoL) of the
consumer. It is expected that a package of policies, information services, and product
development focusing on the improvement of QoL without increasing environmental
load will be developed where high economic growth is forecast such as in Asian
countries. Traditional eco-product design methods and methodologies for reducing the
environmental load of a product life cycle have been developed and eco-design guidelines are being standardized [15, 37]. Although eco-products are being diffused gradually
in industrialized countries [33, 34], no QoL-conscious eco-product design methodology
for emergent or developing countries has been established.
In this study, locally oriented sustainable design implies that local or region-specific
conditions are reflected in the specifications or eco-design ideas of a product in the design
stage. We propose a systematic approach connecting the sufficiency of the daily life of a
consumer and the product development process, called the living-sphere approach. We
describe a framework for the living-sphere approach. We focus on the part of the function
or structure that is affected strongly by region-specific conditions, such as history, culture,
habits, and social infrastructure. We assume that it is impossible to separate human life
completely from the land that people occupy. Related studies are surveyed in the next section,
and the living-sphere approach is proposed in “Framework of the Living-sphere Approach”.
240
Total municipal waste generation

Relative index (1980=100)

220

Population OECD
200
180
160
140
120
100
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

105

The significance of the work and remaining issues are discussed in “Discussion”, and
“Concluding remarks” are provided in the final section.

Related works
The so-called factor index describes the improvement ratio of eco-efficiency, which is the
product value per unit of environmental load caused by the product life cycle [19]. Although
this factor index of a product can be applied to industrial products generally, the total
sufficiency of the needs or the factor index of a household cannot be quantified where various
products are used in daily life. A study of the factor index calculation for a household focusing
on home appliances has been reported [2]. However, the method cannot consider satisfaction
and region-specific characteristics because it estimates the factor index focusing on only the
technological progress in the basic product functions. The concepts of eco-efficiency and
sufficiency are important in SCP patterns; however, these concepts are different [7, 38]. Ecoefficiency is a management philosophy that encourages business to search for environmental improvements that yield parallel economic benefits [38]. It focuses on business
opportunities to become more environmentally responsible and more profitable, therefore, it is proposed from a viewpoint of production. On the other hand, the concept of
“sufficiency” has emerged over the years as an alternative economic model to consumerism and a necessary component of sustainable lifestyles. Sufficiency challenges the
notion that if some is good, then more must be better; instead, it emphasizes
“enoughness” [38]. This paper focuses on sufficiency rather than eco-efficiency.
Koren suggested that the personalization and regionalization in the manufacturing industry
after globalization is a paradigm shift [21]. Here, we discuss personalization and regionalization in relation to the context dependency. For example, service engineering focuses on
abstracting and valuing the context of the personal user and one of the methods for this is
the persona approach [18]. However, it is important to abstract product specifications depending on the region-specific context through the systematic analysis of daily life [29]. It is
difficult to consider the region-specific context in full via the persona approach, because this
approach is insufficient in terms of relatively large spatiotemporal considerations such as the
climate, culture, and institutions. Hofstede pointed out that cultural dimensions can explain
many cultural differences at the region or country level [10] and there is a correlation between
personality factors and cultural dimensions [11]. In this study, we focus on the differences
arising from spatiotemporal factors.
Generally, the earliest development of a consumer product is a marketing process. In the
traditional marketing process, the 3 Cs, namely, the customer, the competitors, and the
company, are analyzed initially [26]. However, customer analysis focuses on increasing the
profit of a product or service provider; thus, it does not necessarily focus on satisfying the
customers’ needs. In fact, it is important to observe the sufficiency of the consumers’ daily
needs closely. Recently, ethnography has been used as a method of field observation for
product and service marketing [1]. There is no proper procedural methodology for ethnography, and the user context is understood in detail from examining daily life. The ethnographic
approach is strongly affected by the subjectivity of the observer and its reproducibility is low.



However, gains and pains are derived based on customer jobs in the customer segment area. A
product is selected if it fits with the customer’s gains or pains. Because the value proposition
canvas is for earning sales from segmented customers, it is not sufficient to achieve SCP for all
people in the target region.
There are various study fields related to QoL studies such as human needs, welfare
and well-being. Various concepts of human needs have been proposed. For instance, 30
kinds of human needs have been defined in the literature [5]. Although usually people
believe that human needs change with cultural progress or period, Max-Neef claimed that
basic human needs are universal, but satisfiers fulfilling the basic needs depend on
region, culture, and period [22]. Here, basic human needs are the opposite of highorder needs, and they are synonymous with absolute or universal needs [5]. In welfare
economics, the capability approach was proposed by Sen [28]. The capability approach
focuses on freedom and opportunity of choice for measuring latent ability, and it is used
for the human development index (HDI) established by the United Nations Development
Programme [36]. The HDI shows an integrated value consisting of the national average
lifetime, literacy rate, school attendance rate, and GDP per capita. The approach for
measuring subjective well-being developed by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development is a typical well-being approach [25, 30]. This approach
uses a questionnaire to find out whether people are satisfied with their daily life, and it is
recognized as a reliable method, although there is a lack of data for emergent or
developing countries. According to the traditional perspective of the linear well-being
model, a consumer accomplishes well-being based on satisfaction achieved by consuming products and services [16] (Fig. 2). Although well-being and related products are
connected qualitatively in this model, there is no systematic study on the relationship
between well-being and the product development process.
When we set the target product, a traditional product development methodology can
be applied that focuses on required functions (What) and deploys them in the product
structure (How) using a function-structure map and quality function deployment [3].
Here, in the early phase of product development, a value graph is used to confirm the
reason for the existence (Why) and true value of the target product [14]. Figure 3 shows
an example of a simple value graph of a hair dryer. First, the design engineer recognizes
the basic values of a product by thinking why the product or requirement exists. This
recognition process is used to create the upper part of the value graph. Next, the design
engineer considers what functions are required for realizing the basic values and how to
realize the required functions. This thought process is used to create the lower part of the

107

Fig. 3 Example of a value graph [14]

product. The value graph should be created by people from various departments, such as
product design, research and development, marketing, sales promotion, manufacturing,
and quality control, because it is useful for all these people to clarify product requirements. The basic values of a product already on the market should be re-realized when a
new product is designed.
Product design support approaches for local markets, such as developing countries, include
localization of an original global standardized product, sometimes called “glocalization”, and
co-design, which embeds local people into the product development process [20]. In
glocalization, it is difficult to modify a product for a developed country to suit a developing
country just by simplifying the function and structure of the product. Moreover, the design
reproducibility of both approaches is low. To accomplish high reproducibility and market-in
product development, we have proposed an extended function-structure map (EFSM), in
which local or region-specific information is mapped on a traditional function-structure map,
and a visualization system for the EFSM [20, 31].

Framework of the living-sphere approach
Figure 4 shows the framework of the living-sphere approach, and we explain the
concepts used in the living-sphere approach. In the uppermost layer, human needs and
satisfiers are set. Because this study is for SCP, the human needs we selected are basic
needs, not egoistic infinite needs. Two categories of basic human needs proposed by
Max-Neef are used [22]. As the axiological category, the following nine needs are
introduced: Subsistence, Protection, Affection, Understanding, Participation, Idleness,
Creation, Identity, and Freedom. False needs, which are not related to daily life, are



Fig. 4 Schematic of the living-sphere approach framework

and are selected depending on personal factors, such as religion and hobbies, and on sitespecific factors, such as regional history, culture, climate, social systems, and institutions. We focus on the site-specific factors. If the starting point of the thinking process is
on the basic human needs side, a product is regarded as a method of realizing satisfiers.
Thus, the value graph of the target product [14] satisfying basic needs should be
connected to appropriate satisfiers.
In our framework, we assume that a design engineer can develop products satisfying basic
human needs and improving QoL by confirming a connection between satisfiers and value
graphs. In this way, the sufficiency of human needs and product development are connected
systematically. Next, we describe the procedure for connecting related concepts during the
product development process based on the proposed approach (Fig. 5).
STEP 1: The target field is investigated by a literature survey and field observations
focusing on well-diffused durable products.
STEP 2: Based on the results, satisfiers realizing basic needs in the target region are abstracted
and are placed in a nine-by-four categorized needs matrix by target people and analysts.
STEP 3: Value graphs of well-diffused durable products are developed by engineers, and
the value graphs and satisfiers are connected.

109

The results of these steps are interpreted by using four categories as follows (Fig. 6).
Category a): If the value graph of a product connects to one or more satisfiers, then the
product is significant for satisfying basic human needs, in other words, improving QoL.
In this case, region-specific information related to the whole product life cycle, namely,
usage, product disposal, waste treatment and environmental load of each life cycle
process is visualized on the EFSM to help improve the design [31].
Category b): If a value graph of a product does not connect to any satisfiers, then they are
categorized as products that are not important for satisfying basic human needs. The
priority for the product should be low in the proposed approach.
Category c): If a satisfier connects to services or actions instead of products, then it is
acceptable from a viewpoint of sufficiency of basic needs.
Category d): If a satisfier does not connect to a product, service, or action, then a
new concept, including a new product, service, or action, should be considered for
satisfying the satisfier.

Discussion
As a simple example, the relationship between satisfiers and value graphs for refrigerators and rice cookers is shown in Fig. 7. The satisfiers abstracted by field studies are set
in a matrix divided by needs categories. Black arrows represent the connections common
to developing and developed countries, blue arrows represent connections for developed
countries, and red arrows represent connections for developing countries. For example,
the basic purpose of refrigerators is food storage; however, they are also used for drug
and cosmetic storage in developed countries. These purposes are connected to the
satisfiers “physical health” or “sensuality” for developed countries only. However, rice
cookers in developing countries are used for cooking vegetables as well as rice. In
developed countries, refrigerators and rice cookers are also connected to eating tasty
food. To support eating tasty food, specific functions and parts of the products are
considered. These connections are not emphasized in developing countries. In this
example, two value graphs are connected to some satisfiers, allowing a design engineer
to understand the relationships among the needs satisfaction, requirements, function, and



Fig. 7 An example of satisfiers and value graphs for rice cookers and refrigerators

Figure 7 shows two overlapping diagrams for different regions. A connected diagram of satisfiers
and value graphs helps to clarify the difference in product roles between regions. To improve
understanding, each diagram should be drawn separately at first. In this case, there is a dependent
relation among satisfiers. The “physical health” satisfier depends on “eating”, and “eating” depends
strictly on “food”. A method that can treat this type of case will be considered in future work.
The methods in this study and the value proposition canvas [27] are similar in terms of
fitting the elements deployed from the user need side and the product side. Nevertheless, these
methods are clearly different from each other. As we mention in the Related Works section, the
value proposition canvas is a marketing tool to increase sales; thus, it tends to focus on
attractive qualities [17]. However, SCP should be achieved for all people in the target regions.
This study focuses on “must-be qualities” [17], which have not been understood sufficiently,
especially by design engineers in other regions. Thus, universal basic human needs are the
main premise and the starting points in this study.
The importance of the proposed approach is twofold. First, the traditional single product
development process is explicitly connected to improving the total sufficiency of basic needs
in the same framework. Consequently, a design engineer can recognize the position of their

111

quality function deployment [3], for a single product. Applying the proposed approach is
expected to reduce overconsumption of natural resources from selling too many kinds of
product. This direction is different from the product development strategy under the mass
production paradigm, namely, to manufacture many better products and release them to the
market rapidly. This method for reducing overconsumption is effective for more developed
countries. For consumers in developing countries, the method is expected to improve sufficiency of basic needs with minimal costs because these consumers only need to buy products
obviously connected to satisfiers. The disposable income of consumers in developing countries
is less than that of developed countries; thus, the proposed approach is promising in reality.
The following issues still need to be overcome.
1. Appropriate satisfiers must be set in the proposed framework. However, the selection
process is not supported. Selection depends on the subjectivity of the observer and the
participants. For instance, a workshop method for abstracting satisfiers has been reported
[9]. One of the difficulties of handling satisfiers is that they are described in the natural
language of the target region. Recognition of the external world, including nature and
artefacts, depends on culture and language [6]. Although satisfiers abstracted from foreign
countries must be translated when we analyse them, it is difficult in some cases. This issue
is crucial in handling satisfiers; however, it should be considered in future work.
2. A support method for connecting a value graph of a product and a satisfier is needed. Here,
the laddering method is used for marketing as a bottom-up method [12]. The laddering
method may help to connect functions of a product and a satisfier systematically.
3. The proposed approach can be used to improve product design. However, for category d) in
Fig. 6, whether a new product or service satisfies the satisfier is examined. Methods for
fulfilling a satisfier are not limited to artificial and commercial goods; they depend on lifestyle,
and thus on region-specific conditions. These idea generation methods require further study.
4. The proposed framework focuses on social sustainability, and is intended to fulfil the basic
needs of the living sphere in the target region. A method for quantifying improvement in
the sufficiency of basic needs or QoL is needed. On the other hand, balancing environmental load reduction and improvement of current QoL is essential for sustainable design.
Thus, existing eco-design methods should be added to the framework.
5. Application of the proposed framework to a product-service system (PSS), including reuse
and remanufacturing services, is to be considered. Recently, PSSs have focused on
resource efficiency [32] and reuse [8]. This type of PSS is called a sustainable PSS. In
this paper, we have focused on the connection between product requirements and the
sufficiency of basic needs. However, the proposed framework can also apply to services.
In future work, integration of a PSS or sustainable PSS into the proposed framework will
be considered. If the values of a remanufacturing product are slightly different from those
of a new product, then it can be described in the proposed framework.

Concluding Remarks



development process can be connected in the proposed framework. In addition, our approach
supports both designing a single product and total optimization of multi-products at the
requirement level. We focused on fulfilling basic needs for achieving SCP. By recognizing
the differences in satisfiers between regions, countries, or local communities, SCP can be
considered more clearly in the context of climate and culture. If we introduce a PSS instead of
a product in the proposed framework, then satisfiers drive a locally oriented PSS. In contrast,
environmental sustainability cannot be considered explicitly in this framework because the
proposed framework aims for social sustainability. Both types of sustainability should be
integrated in future work. In addition, case studies will be performed for different countries to
evaluate the usefulness of the proposed approach.
