Organizations’ responsibility to consumers

AE

THE SUSTAINABILITY OF FISH CONSUMPTION IN ROMANIA:
CUSTOMER BEHAVIOUR PRIOR
AND AFTER THE COUNTRY’S ADHERENCE TO THE EU
1) 2)

Vlad Roşca1* and Raluca Ignat2
The Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania

Abstract
Using two sets of bivariate analyses in SPSS, we have tried to find out how sustainable the
fish consumption in Romania is. We have used numerical variables, computed based on
primary data obtained from Eurostat and the National Institute of Statistics. Two different
timespans have been considered: the one prior to the country’s adherence to the European
Union and the one after. Using the two timespans let us compare the pre- and postadherence situations, in order to see if the subsidies offered by the EU have had any effect
on the sustainability of the environment.
The variables used have been of economic nature (index of real earnings), respectively
related to the sustainable consumption of fish, all computed for one calendar year (total fish
consumption, captures from inland waters, and aquaculture production). The results
indicate significant correlations between total consumption and captures (r = .947 for the
first and r = .990 for the second timespan), and between real earnings and consumption,
respectively captures (only for the first timespan), but not significant correlations for the
links between aquaculture and the rest of the variables. This shows a high pressure placed
on the natural environment, which could eventually be reduced by improving aquaculture
production.
Keywords: sustainable consumption, customers, sustainability, aquaculture, captures from
inland waters, index of real earnings
JEL Classification: E21, F15, F40, Q25, Q52, Q53, Q57
Introduction
Changes in marine ecosystems call for a more sustainable future, requiring a correlation of
the seafood consumption with the fishing activity. Science and practice have tried for some
decades now to make consumers aware of environmental norms and efficient behavior
(Dinu, 2012, Spaargaren, 2011). In this article we wanted to investigate how sustainable
fish consumption in Romania was prior and after the country’s adherence to the European
Union. To prepare the results and their interpretation, we started with literature review, in
*

Contact author, Vlad Roşca – vlad_rsc@yahoo.com

which we have tried to present some important aspects related to sustainable consumption,
so that we could set the conceptual framework of the research. A subchapter of the review
was dedicated to the relationship between sustainable consumption and economic systems,
and it was meant to show that the lack of market equilibrium and the customers’ lack of
awareness of a decreasing marginal utility can have negative effects both on the economic
and ecologic stability. The literature review ends with a presentation of the sustainable
consumption in aquatic environments and with an introduction of several key concepts
relating to aquaculture, an important component of sustainability in fishing.
The second part of the paper is dedicated to the research methodology, in which we have
presented information about data sources and the way in which these have been processed
in order to fit the purpose of research, about the software used to save and analyze data, and
about the types of statistical computations carried out. The methodology also presents, on a
wider basis, the research aims, the research objectives, and the research questions. The
study ends with a presentation and an interpretation of the results, as well as with a series of
conclusions meant to test the hypotheses launched in the research.
1. Literature Review
Evans (2011) argues that the issue of sustainable consumption has become a hot topic since
the 1992 Earth Summit, which focused on the impact consumption patterns of
industrialized societies have had on the environment. Led by several factors such as
urbanization, growth in income and spending power, and growth of population, increased
per capita consumption placed pressure on ecosystems, threatening their structures
(Rosegrant et al., 2001; Safarzynska, 2013).
Scientific research has been a keen follower of the topic. An important segment of the
academic literature has chosen to define sustainable consumption while presenting what
non-sustained consumption meant (Bansal et al., 2007). Yang (2011) outlines non-sustained
consumption as a type of consumption that permanently bares the risk of random shocks for
the environment. Diamond (1982) went so far as to state that not only the environment, but
the entire economic system was threatened by overabundance in consuming goods.
The rich empirical evidence on non-sustainability can be explained through the
sustainability/non-sustainability dyad. According to it, while it is widely acknowledged that
durable consumption has an important role, it seems that non-sustainability is the normal
order of things: in many cases, with the price of satisfying consumption, little attention is
granted to ecosystems. At the call of several organizations that have identified nonsustainability as a cause of environmental decadence (UNDP, 1998), sustainability
concerns were transformed into political ideologies. After decades in which the public
discourse was ruled by the myths of growth, politics and businesses have become aware of
the importance and necessity of sustenance (Nielsen, 2011). The limits of economic growth
have been demonstrated especially after the recent financial crisis, setting the grounds for
sustainability to win share of interest. Politics have materialized sustainability concerns in
programs aiming at improving production and resource collecting techniques so as to raise
economic efficiency and also make the environment cleaner and wealthier. Nonetheless, it
has to be noticed that even in turmoil times, economic growth continues to be regarded as
the main factor of progress. Therefore, political initiatives do not always result in
maintainable consumption and production designs. Consumers and producers continue to
conduct their actions so as to maximize economic benefits, their decisions often having
a delicate issue, governments often hang back when it comes to assuming responsibility
(Lafferty, Meadowcroft, 2000). The scapegoats often blamed for unsustenance are
consumers themselves, althoug sustainability means the optimal combination between
consumption and production, the latter one missing from the equation. Governmental
bodies and researchers alike claim that people consume too much and, therefore, place
pressure on ecossystems (Arrow et al., 2004; OECD, 2001).
Impelling people to change behavior can be achieved by clearly presenting them what
sustainable consumption is about. In this direction, another school of thought, focusing on
the positive, sustainable part of the dyad, claims its rights. Observational proof on
sustainable consumption defines the concept as a type of consumption that can satisfy the
needs of current and coming generations of consumers without altering ecosystems (Phipps
et al., 2013). In fact, one of the main characteristics of sustainable consumption is its drive
towards protecting the efectiveness of natural environments (Bandura, 1986).
Following the increasing advent of social responsibility on the agendas of public and
private organizations, the International Standardization Organization has created ISO
26000, a social responsibility dedicated guidance (Castka, Balzarova, 2008; Schwartz,
Tilling, 2009). This global initiative tries to integrate more responsibility in the production
strategies and operations, as well as in consumption (Castka, Balzarova, 2007). ISO 26000
encourages producers to supply their customers with quality-rich products, both from a
technological point of view, as well as in what concerns the environment. Nevertheless,
Hemphill (2013) considers that the implementation of ISO 26000 is hindered by its own too
large horizons: without sector or industry dedicated measures, each and everey producer
can understand the standard in different ways. To bear in mind for the fishing industry is
that ISO 26000 makes clear references to the protection of animals, the elimination of the
negative impact of captures upon the environment, the correlation of supply with demand
and the provision of full and true information for consumers.
1.1 Importance for economic system
While it is closely related to the environment, sustainabile consumption would not exist
without also being interrelated to economics. Therefore, it has become of a particular
interest for many scientists to investigate the associations between sustainability and
economy. The main claim of this course of research is that economic growth has to be
scaled to a proper size where environmental goals are not affected. Researchers argue that
consumers must become more aware of the saturation level (Cohen, 2001).
Acknowledgeing that consumption is limited by the law of descending utilities can have a
major impact upon the wider economy, which makes sustainable consumption an issue not
only of consumers, but of producers as well. As an important part of consumption is met by
economic goods, the production of the latter ones also becomes part of the sustainable
consumption debate. Hence, the quest in sustainable consumption is to either consume or
produce in such a way as not to harm the surroundings. Accordingly, sustainability can be
presented as the degree in which a system can combine ecological goals with economic
growth (Prelipcean, Boscoianu, 2012). Moreover, Manoochehri (2002) identifies market
mechanisms as the main building blocks of sustainability.
Because sustainable consumption is directly influenced by consumers, supply will have to
adapt, with request and bid having to meet on the market. However, in the lack of market
equilibrium, consumption and production alike bare the risks of becoming threats to

sustainability (Dragulanescu, 2007). With greedy producers and rapacious consumers,
politics are often left the only chance to intervene and regulate markets. The “Our Common
Future” report in 1987 showed that sustainability is a matter of needs and limitations, which
time and again are pulled in through political programs, as neither customers, nor producers
are ready to restrict themselves. On the one hand side, people ought to reduce their
consumption to a level at which their needs are satisfied. Then, and not less important,
producers should adapt their offerings to the level of the demand. However, failure in doing
so leads to overconsumption and overproducing, which once appeared will continue to
trigger one another.
1.2 Aquatic environments
In what concerns Aquatic environments, scientific literature recognizes the importance of
complex marine and riverine ecosystems for the sustainable development of the fishing
industry (Akpalu, Bitew, 2011; Douvere, 2008). Proper water use management is seen as a
critical step in helping ecosystems develop, with recent enterprises concentrating on the
need to conserve delicate areas (Douvere, 2008). Sustainability concerns directed towards
watery ecosystems involve both overconsumption and overexploitation. Overconsumption
of fish impacts the marine environments as natural fish stocks risk being depleted in the
hunt to ensure the supply needed to match the inflated market demand (Ellis, 2003). The
increased commercialization of fish products has led to an industrialization of fishing with
severe effects on the natural surroundings. Human exploitation of natural waters has been
demonstrated to alter the structures of ecosystems. Myers and Worm (2003), for example,
identify species of fish that have been reduced to less than ten per cent of the quantity
which used to exist in pre-industrialized ages. Overfishing is regarded as one of the highest
threats to the functioning of marine ecosystems, next to climate-driven effects (Dudgeon et
al., 2006; Grădinaru, 2002). Eliminating fish from rivers and seas can have negative
impacts on the ecosystems (Sinclair, Valdimarsson, 2003). Because it does not let fish
stocks reap optimally, overfishing is considered a not advisable situation (Silberschneider et
al., 2009). While sustainability is widely seen as the most appropiate solution for stopping
the environmental degradation (Pasqual, Souto, 2003), innovations in production systems
can’t guarantee sustainability if unmatched by modifications in consumption behavior.
Sustainability, hence, becomes a question of correlating supply and demand for fish food.
Fish captures need to be matched by sustainable consumption patterns. One of the main
concerns in the current global economy is the overexploitation of resources, which shows
that production and consumption volumes are yet unmatched properly (Lehtoranta et al.,
2011). Based on own calculations from FAO data, we identify that Romania has wasted
9580 tonnes of fish food between 2002 and 2008. Table 1 shows the amount of waste per
years, computed by substracting the annual total consumption of fish-food products (in
tonnes) from the amount of fish in the domestic supply that was used purely for food
purposes. Such wastes, it has been demonstrated, alter the structures of ecosystems: to
many a fish captured in natural waters leads to a reduction of the living matter and of
potential yelds (Howes, 1998; Oguz et al., 2012; Planque et al., 2010). Stocks are reduced
to a level wherefrom sustainability is threatened (Ludicello et al., 1999). The numbers
presented in Table 1 and the graphic representation in Figure 1 indicate that fish
consumption in Romania was not sustainable yet until 2008. This unsustainability placed
pressure on Romania’s trade balance. While fish captured in inland waters and fish grown
in aquaculture were not enough to satisfy the customers’ demands, Romania was forced to
import fish from overseas. Figures provided by FAO between 2002 and 2009 show that

during that timespan. However, not only the trade balance was in danger.
Table nr. 1: Fish food waste in Romania between 2002 and 2008 (in tonnes)
Year
Waste (in tonnes)
2002
1074
2003
1674
2004
1117
2005
4246
2006
159
2007
410
2008
900
Total
9580
Source: Own computations based on raw data from FAO.
Motivated by overconsumption, fisheries tended to overexploit natural waters. Prior to
Romania’s EU integration many aquacultures have failed in doing business profitability,
which would have translated through taking the burden of off the natural environment.
Figures show that aquaculture production has decreased in the years leading towards 2007,
while the captures from inland waters tended to grow. As overfishing was motivated by
unsustainable consumption, the European Union was forced to intervene in order to protect
stocks in natural waters. The EU opened the non refundable grant Axis 2, Measure 2.1. –
Productive Investments in Aquaculture in order to stimulate aquaculture and promote better
fishing practices, so as to reduce overfishing and to guarantee more sustainability.

Figure nr. 1: Romania’s waste of fish food between 2002 and 2008 (in tonnes)
Source: Own computations and representation based on raw statistics from FAO 2013.

Aquaculture can be simply presented as farming fish and other submarine organisms such
as crustaceans, molluscs, or aquatic plants (De Silva, Anderson, 1995, p. 5; Edwards,
2000). According to De Silva and Anderson (1995), aquaculture can take various forms:
 Artificially growing fish and releasing them in natural waters from where they will be
captured;
 Capturing fish from natural waters and growing them artificially up to the moment
when they are going to be sold to the market;
 Raising and feeding fish from its youth.
Romania, as well as other developing countries, still faces problems in improving its
aquaculture industry. Amongst the most important difficulties are the slowness in adopting
modern technology and the limited national research and education capacities (Edwards,
1998; Istudor et al., 2010). The economic difficulties faced by Romania delayed the
country’s potential to improve its aquaculture base. First, macroeconomic data show that
Romania lags compared to most of its European Union coutnerparts. For example, GDP per
capita in 2010’s Romania was only 22 per cent of the EU-27 average (Eurostat, Key figures
on Europe, 2011, p. 19), which indicates that both consumption and investment power are
reduced. Second, national agricultural trends are on a downward slope: the added value
generated by the local agriculture between 2008 and 2009 decreased twice as fast the EU’s
(Ignat, 2011). In such a situation, the aquaculture can’t satisfy the local demand for fish,
even if it did complement with the local fish captures. As can be seen in Figure 2, the
annual total consumption of fish lies far above what aquaculture can produce.

Figure nr. 2: Comparison between the total consumption of fish and the production of
aquaculture (in tonnes), 2002-2011
Source: FAO Stat, 2013. Own representation
2. Methodology
The purpose of our study was to investigate how sustainable fish consumption patterns
were in Romania prior to and after the country’s integration in the European Union. We
have therefore chosen two courses of action. First, we wanted to find out how economic
changes influenced sustainable consumption. The rationale behind this research aim was
consumption patterns. We have set out to answer this question as Romania’s integration to
the European Union occurred at a moment placed right after the country’s economic boom
and prior to the global financial crisis. We found it interesting to see whether the shift from
one economic end to another has had any impact on how people consumed fish, especially
as Rosegrant et al. (2001) note that times of economic change usually have a major
influence on consumption patterns and their sustainability. We were also interested in
following whether the free acces to the pan-continental market impacted sustainable
consumption? With the local market opening for foreign goods, we set to find out if this has
had any influence on sustainability and on the wellbeeing of ecosystems.
Second, we wanted to investigate how the stimulation of aquaculture has influenced both
fish consumption and sustainability. Therefore, our research questions were the following:
RQ1: How did economic changes influence sustainable consumption?
RQ2: How did aquaculture influence sustainable consumption?
For the purpose of our paper, we have defined sustainable consumption as a consumption
pattern stable over time, backed by a decrease of captures from natural fishing areas and an
increase of the aquaculture productivity.
The study took the form of a correlational research, concerned with establishing the
interdependences between several macroeconomic and sustainable consumption variables.
Raw data was gathered from Eurostat and from the Romanian National Institute of
Statistics, using materials provided on the websites of the organizations, as well as the
Romanian Statistical Yearbook 2011. Two types of numeric variables were gathered:
macroeconomic and sustainability variables. The macroeconomic variable, “Index of real
earnings”, was collected from the National Institute of Statistics. The National Institute of
Statistics defines the Index as “a ratio between values of the same variables recorded in
various time or territorial units” (Romanian Statistical Yearbook, 2011, p. IX). Hence, the
Index of real earnings lets know how real earnings of people have changed over time. For
our study, the index was used as a measure of the consumers’ economic wellbeeing, the
latter one being further used in order to test the impacts of economic changes on
sustainability. In what concerns the sustainability variables, three fish consumption-related
variables were used, all of them collected from Eurostat: Total fish consumption (in tonnes,
per year), Captures from inland waters (in tonnes, per year), and Aquaculture (production in
tonnes, per year).
Collected data was stored and computed in Microsoft Excel. In several cases, computations
have been done in order to find out the approximate value/year. For example, the fish
consumption figures provided by Eurostat were given as per capita consumption in
kilograms a year. So as to find the total yearly fish consumption in tonnes, we identified the
total population of Romania for that particular year (provided by the National Institute of
Statistics) and multiplied it with the per capita consumption, and then divided by 1000.
Secondly, as in some cases figures were lacking for Captures in inland waters, and
Aquaculture, we had to make computations around the data reported by Eurostat for Total
fish production in order to find the former two variables. We therefore used the following
two formulae:
Aquaculture = Total Fish Production – Captures in inland waters
Captures in inland waters = Total Fish Production - Aquaculture
Two timespans have been chosen for analysis. The first one, 2004-2006 (n=3),
corresponded to Romania’s pre-integration period, while the second one, 2007-2010 (n=4),
corresponded to the period after Romania has been accepted in the European Union.
The IBM SPSS Statistics v19 software was used to carry out the correlations. Bivariate
analyses have been conducted in SPSS in order to identify the influences that
macroeconomic developments and aquaculture have had on sustainable consumption before
and after Romania’s entering into the EU. The aims of the bivariate correlations were to
find out the interdependencies between variables. Overall, six correlations have been made.
First, we tried to find out how economic growth influenced the three sustainability
variables, with a particular focus on total consumption and captures from inland waters.
Then, we were also interested to see how aquaculture influenced total fish consumption and
the captures from inland waters. Last but not least, we have investigated the relationship
between captures from inland waters and total fish consumption.
The six correlations were carried out for the 2004-2006 period, and then repeated for the
2007-2010 period. This resulted in two separate sets of data, which were thereafter
compared in order to see wether differences in sustainable consumption can be identified
for the period before Romania’s EU integration and the one after. 2004 was used as the
reference year for the index of real earnings: changes in real earnings for 2007, 2008, 2009
and 2010 were reported to the basics of 2004 (100).
We used Pearson’s r to find out whether there was any correlation between the four
variables used in the study. If this first condition was true, the r then offered further
information about the direction and the significance of the relationship.
3. Results
Note that we have carried out two identical correlational computations, but for two different
timpespans: 2004-2006 (n=3) and 2007-2010 (n=4). The correlations were run using the
bivariate analysis function in SPSS. A two-tailed test of significance was used, with the
confidence interval set at a 95 per cent confidence level (sig 2-tailed level of significance at
.05). For analyzing and showing the data in this paper, we have used the following
abbreviations: Ind = Index of real earnings; Tfc = Total fish consumption; Ciw = Captures
from inland waters; Aqua = Aquaculture production.
The values of the Pearson’s r’s for the 2004-2006 timespan are displayed in Table 2.
Table nr. 2: Pearson’s r’s values of the bivariate correlations between Ind, Tfc, Ciw,
and Aqua for the 2004-2006 timespan
Ind

Tfc (tonnes)

Ciw (tonnes)

Aqua

1.000

Ind

.941

.346

.947

.364

Tfc (tonnes)

1.000

Ciw (tonnes)

.941

.947

Aqua

.346

.364

.644
.644

The critical value for the Pearson r in this case where n = 3 lies at .878. The bolded
numbers in Table 2 are the ones equal or higher than .878, and therefore, significant. There
are three significant correlations, of which one, between the Index of real earnings and the
perfectly positive. The other two significant correlations occur amongst the Index of real
earnings and the Captures from inland waters (r = .941) and amonst the Total fish
consumption and the Captures from inland waters (r = . 947). It is interesting to see that
Aquaculture is the one and only variable that couldn’t produce significant correlations, all
of its associations being beneath the critical r border at .878.
The results of the second series of correlations, for the 2007-2010 timespan, are displayed
in Table 3.
Table 3: Pearson’s r’s results of the bivariate correlations between Ind, Tfc, Ciw, and
Aqua for the 2007-2010 timespan
 
Ind 
Tfc (tonnes) 
Ciw (tonnes) 
Aqua 
Ind 

 

‐528 

‐413 

.565 

Tfc (tonnes) 

‐528 

 

.990* 

.270 

Ciw (tonnes) 

‐413 

.990* 

 

.343 

Aqua 

.565 
.270 
.343 
Note: (*) Confidence level at 0.01

 

The critical value for the Pearson r for the second set of correlations, where n = 4, lies at
.811. Therefore, out of the three valid correlations in the previous analysis, only one,
between the Total fish consumption and the Captures from inland waters kept its
significance, and even this one at a 0.01 level of at least .917. None of the other five
correlations is significant, which includes neither of the other two that were significant in
the first set, which both included the Index of real earnings. The Aquaculture variable still
couldn’t establish significant correlations.
4. Discussions
The results for the 2004-2006 interval indicate that during those years fish consumption
was strongly influenced by the growth in earnings: Romanian consumers demanded more
fish products as a consequence of their improved economic condition. While the market for
fish food developed between 2004 and 2006, it has to be said that the same happened with
the desires of customers, who demanded more fish from natural waters, as a consequence of
the perception that this latter type of fish was of a greater quality than aquaculture fish.
Evidence shows that the increase in real earnings is strongly correlated with the captures
from inland waters (r = .941). This lets us conclude that, as Romanian customers had more
disposable incomes, they demanded more fish from natural waters. As a consequence of
this type of demand, captures from inland waters increased between 2004 and 2006, as
Figure 3 displays.

Figure nr. 3: Captures from inland waters between 2004 and 2006 (in tonnes)
Source: Own display based on Eurostat data
Meanwhile, results show that the correlation of the aquaculture production with all the
other indicators is insignificant, which leads us to the following observations:
 Aquaculture production before 2007 was not strongly stimulated by internal market
demand, but rather by other factors;
 Improved earnings of customers did not have much effect on the aquaculture
production between 2004 and 2006, with the demand for this sort of fish even falling during
that period;
 As the correlation between aquaculture and total fish consumption is not significant
(.364), it can be said that Romanian consumers satisfied their needs for fish food from other
sources, like natural waters productions or imports, aquaculture being mostly used for nonalimentary sources.
Hence, while the national economy improved and their earnings increased, Romanian
consumers opted for more fish from natural waters, which led to a steady decline in demand
for aquaculture products between 2003 and 2005, as can be seen in Figure 4. It is true the
same downward slope is visible for the captures in inland waters. However, sustained by a
higher demand due to increased earnings, the demand for fish from natural waters
recovered faster. The circles in Figure 4 indicate that, while production of aquaculture fish
was still falling, the capture of fish from inland waters recovered momentum. The SPSS
analysis indicates that the faster growth of the captures from inland waters (50% growth
year over, from 2005 to 2006) compared to the aquaculture production (25% growth year
over, from 2005 to 2006) was motivated through the higher demand for fishes from natural
waters, made possible by the increased earnings of customers and by the already mentioned
perception of higher quality of natural water fish.
It can be said that the economic developments in Romania between 2003 and 2007 led to
the intensification of unsustenance in fish consumption, with the customers demanding
more fish from natural waters. Such a demand has put pressure on the local marine and
riverine ecosystems. Therefore, the EU continued to subsidize aquaculture after 2007 as
well, after in the years before it has contributed with SAPARD funds. The aim was and still
is to improve aquaculture so as to possibly replace the fish from natural waters in the
show that, after 2007, there isn’t any more a significant correlation between the
economical, expressed by the index of real earnings, and the fish consumption, respectively
the captures from inland waters.

Figure nr. 4: Comparison between aquaculture production
and captures from inland waters, 2004-2006 (tonnes)
Source: Own display based on Eurostat data
Although highly increased as compared to 2004, the fish consumption was motivated by
other factors than economical ones. At the same time, the captures from inland waters have
been reduced, after the country’s adherence to the EU, to nearly half the level of 2004. So,
if for 2004-2006, a perfect positive correlation existed between the index of real earnings
and the fish consumption (the consumption was directly proportional with the evolution of
wage earnings, moving the same way as the latter ones moved), after 2007, the relationship
between the two variables is not significant anymore. Such a situation can signify that the
Romanian consumers have got acquantied with the consumption of fish, as well as the
transformation of fish in a consumption good accesible to the wider public. As can be seen
in Figure 5, the annual consumption of fish per head has followed the direction of the index
of real earnings, which confirms one of the hypotheses of our research. To note would be
the different dynamics: slowly growths of the real earnings motivated significant growths
of the fish consumption. The dynamics show that 2002-2007 has been a period in which the
Romanian consumers have rediscovered fish in their nutrition after a post-revolutionary
decline influenced by the economic difficulties of the first post-decembrist decade. Once
with the economic recovery and the expansion years in the first half od the new millenium,
which led to an increase of the household earnings, the customers consumed more fish.
Hence, in 2010, Romanians consumed, on average, 58 per cent more fish as in 2002. Only
in 2006, sixteen years after the Revolution, consumers have managed to reestablish the fish
consumption at the level it was in 1990: 5,6 kg/head in 2006 and 5,5 kg/head in 1990.
However, according to FAO data, the level of 1989 (6,8 kg/head) is still far away even from
the level of 2012 (5,3 kg/head). The farther still is the level of 1982-1989, when Romanians
consumed, on average, over 9 kg of fish per year (FAOstat, 2013).
The strong growth of fish consumption between 2002 and 2007 has allowed consumption
to stabilize around five kilos and a half per head a year, even after the breakout of the
global financial crisis. Eventhough after Romania’s adherence to the EU, the fish
consumption has not been influenced any more by wage earnings, once consumer
preferences have been formed, Romanians have not given off fish any more. This positive
trend has also been influenced by the fact that, according to the National Institute of
Statistics, although earnings have decreased after 2008, their level was still higher as the
one of the reference year 2004.

Figure nr. 5: The evolutions of fish consumption and of the index of real earnings
Source: Own display based on Eurostat and INS data
This stabilization, though advantageous for the industry, can prove dangerous for the
quality of natural waters, as aquaculture production couldn’t be stimulated. Research results
show us that there isn’t any significant correlation between aquaculture production and the
consumption of fish, neither for the 2004-2006 timespan, nor for 2007-2010. Some
observations can be made. Once, that Romanian aquaculture is rather used for purposes
other than growig fish for human nutrition. As De Silva and Anderson (1995) showed,
aquaculture does not only mean the artificial nurturnace of fish for accomplishing
alimentary goals, but also its nurturance in order to be later on freed in natural waters or to
be used as a resource in other industries, such as pharmaceutics. Then, while aquaculture
can’t be correlated with consumption in order to fulfill some part of the latter one, the task
of satisfying market demands rests on the shoulders of imports and on the ones of the
captures from inland waters. Hence, eventhough they were reduced to nearly half the level
of 2007, the captures from inland waters, continue to be strongly related to consumption,
significant correlations existing amongst the two both for the 2004-2006 timespan (r =
.947), as well as for 2007-2010 (r = .990).
Conclusions
Here and there, Romanian fish consumption continues to be unsustainable. Eventhough
some positive signals exist, there are still problems. Aquacultures have failed to accomplish
their tasks properly, both prior and after Romania’s adherence to the European Union. The
aftermaths of accessing nearly 52 million Euros from the Prioritary Axis 2, Measure 2.1.,
can’t be seen yet. As long as the embracement of modern production technologies and
schooling of aquafarmers will continue to be delayed, the aquaculture won’t be able to
contribute to the improvement of the sustainable consumption, with the bid for satisfying
aquaculture infrastructure existed, could be protected.
Fish consumption sustainability will only be obtained when the correlation between the
captures from inland waters and consumption will become unsignificant. This would mean
that, however demand would change, the captures from inland waters won’t fluctuate,
remaining at a constant level, on the long term. A first step that could be done for
encouraging sustainable consumption would require the organizations to assume the
responsibility of presenting to customers that aquaculture could be one of the solutions of
protecting the environment. Producers, vendors and distributors can cooperate to present
themselves in front of the customers with honest retailing practices, either for fish from
natural waters or from aquaculture. Without, first of all, the organizations assuming the role
of sustaining a fish consumption based on solutions with low environmental risks, the
behavior of consumers would hardly let itself changed.

