

1 Introduction: problem deﬁnition
Megatrends like urbanization and individualization force
logistic distributors to make their business more and more
efﬁcient. They are forced to minimize the logistic costs but
are facing an increasing volume of one item delivery. This
is well known from the e-commerce business, and the
nearly same important logistic challenge arises within the
area of fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) [1].
Despite the efforts by logistic distributors to raise efﬁciency in their business, logistics across the planet is
societal, environmental and economically unsustainable
[2]. Focussing on those challenges, the Physical Internet
(PI) Initiative tries to address them as an open global
logistics system founded on physical, digital and operational interconnectivity through encapsulation, interfaces
and protocols. The aim of the PI is to enable an efﬁcient
and sustainable logistics web at the logistics hubs as well as
at the end consumer, where current systems are not efﬁcient enough to address the outlined megatrends [2, 3].
First steps in realizing the PI visions have been started in
the project MODULUSHCA funded by the 7th Framework
Programme of the European commission. Fifteen partners
from research, logistics business, postal business and
FMCG industry participate in this research project in close
coordination with North American Partners and the international PI Initiative. This initiative represents the ﬁrst
genuine contribution to the development of interconnected

interconnected logistics system by 2030 [4]. More detailed
information on the integrated work ﬁelds, the overall goals
and the main beneﬁts can be seen in ‘‘Appendix’’
(chapter 11).
The earlier-mentioned FMCG are deﬁned as pharmaceutical, consumer electronic, personal care, household
care, branded and packaged food, spirits and tobacco.
Although the range of products is various, most of them
share the same characteristics [5]: they are used directly by
the end consumer, non-durable, sold in packaged form, are
branded, at a low price with high volumes and used at least
once a month (frequent purchase). The handling of FMCG
in dedicated supply networks takes place in central and
regional warehouses. The ﬁve main process steps within a
logistics centre are the goods receipt, storing, consignment,
storing again and goods issue [6]. The main tasks are
supported by transportation, handling and packaging processes as well as administration processes [5].
The Institute of Logistics Engineering of Graz University of Technology is part of the MODULUSHCA consortium and responsible to develop and realize in the
context of the FMCG one of the key functions of the PI—
the encapsulation of products. This encapsulation is physically realized by containers developed and designed to
meet the requirements from the PI and is therefore one of
the key components and enablers of the PI. The following
chapters will deal especially with this development and
engineering design work and will reveal the ﬁrst physical
object of the PI: the MODULUSHCA-box (M-box). This
M-box is considered as the PI container for FMCG and sets
the ground for further developments in other logistics
sectors.
First results of the research work on the M-box were
presented previously at the 7th International Scientiﬁc
Symposium on Logistics (Cologne 2014) [7, 8]. In the
following work, the authors focus on describing the engineering methods used in the methodological approach to
engineering design the M-box and demonstrate the progress in designing the prototype

2 Overall goals for PI containers
The PI Initiative tries to address the challenges and
demands of the outlined megatrends (see chapter 1) as an
open global logistics system founded on physical, digital
and operational interconnectivity. This interconnectivity
will be realized through encapsulation, interfaces and
protocols. With other words [3]:
The Physical Internet is a global logistics system
based on the interconnection of logistics network by a

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:8

standardized set of collaboration protocols, modular
containers and smart interfaces for increased efﬁciency and sustainability
To underline the polemic statement that today’s logistics
across the planet is societal, environmental and economically unsustainable, vivid symptoms for this unsustainability in logistics and therefore main challenges are
provided by the PI Initiative. In order to meet this challenges, Montreuil is deﬁning the paradigm-breaking PI
vision through 13 characteristics addressing head on the
grand challenge of reverting the huge unsustainability of
the current way we transport, handle, store, realize, supply
and use physical objects around the world [2] (presented in
Table 1).
As far as the container design is concerned, four different Physical Internet Characteristics (number 1, 3, 4 and
8 from Table 1) can be identiﬁed as main development
goals to be transferred to design requirements. Ballot,
Montreuil and Meller further state that the PI will not
handle products directly but rather the containers in which
those products are packed to be transported [3]. Therefore,
those containers are one of the key components and
enablers of the PI. Ballot et al. [3] point out some more
detailed characteristics for the containers, which can be
merged with the overall development goals to identify clear
design requirements:
•

•
•
•
•
•

Unique international identiﬁcation to ensure traceability, in the manner of the BIC code in the maritime
sector.
Physical protection of the content.
Anonymization of the content.
Standardized size.
Standardized mechanical strength which then enables
them to be handled and stacked.
The possibility of handling and locking between
containers using a standardized system, a suitable development of the twist-lock.

In physical terms, main goal in designing PI containers
is to make them easy to handle, store, transport, seal,
interlock, couple, load, unload, construct and dismantle [9].
In terms of the distribution system, main goals are to
build unit loads out of modular containers which are then
loaded on trucks in order to maximize the utilization in
volume and weight [10, 11].
Considering the current situation in FMCG logistics
(described in chapter 1), the overall goals of PI for a future
interconnected, open global network and the aims of
MODULUSHCA (see ‘‘Appendix’’), there are three different layers of approach identiﬁed. Those three layers
therefore mean three main research questions to answer in

Table 1 Physical Internet addressing unsustainability symptoms ([2] Table 2; page 85)

•

•

Sizing
The inventors of the PI distinguish between three
different sizes: large containers with a cross section of
approximately 2.4 m by 2.4 m with a variable length,
medium containers with a size around 1 m3 and small
containers with a size approximately of 0.1 m3 [3]. To
meet the demands of the FMCG logistics and a
standardized system, the research work on the MODULUSHCA project concentrates on developing modular boxes in the magnitude of small- and medium-sized
PI containers.
Design
Uniting the requirements of the PI, the FMCG and from
pooling and logistics industry leads to the requirements
for the physical PI containers. These requirements can
then be realized by engineering design the PI containers
with computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided
engineering (CAE) techniques.

•

Loading
Changing the way actual logistic systems work will
change the way of loading trucks too. In the future PI
scenario, the predominant transport will be in between
PI hubs [9]. Therefore, a PI-loading process within the
PI logistics has to be applied.

Figure 3 highlights the difference between the situations in
supply chain (SC) of FMCG today and in a future scenario of PI
and assigns the three research questions in the different steps of
the distribution process. Where today we pack the products in
an almost inﬁnite range of different-sized cases made of carton,
in a future PI scenario, we will pack the products to a ﬁnite
range of modular PI containers. These PI containers will then be
combined to unit loads and shipped in an interconnected, open
and global point-to-point hub network.
In the German language, the English term ‘‘container’’ is
more commonly used to describe loading devices (see [6]).

introduced here. The M-box describes a special PI container developed in the MODULUSHCA project for
FMCG logistics and its engineering.

3 State of the art
The structure of the paper follows the three-layer approach
described in chapter 2, by describing the treatment of the
three different but on each other depending main research
questions for developing the M-box individually.
3.1 Current sizing methods
During the last years, Meller has presented relevant work in
deﬁning sizes for the PI containers [11, 12]. In this chapter,
his former ﬁndings and research work as well as his ﬁndings as a member of the team from the Institute of Logistics
Engineering for MODULUSHCA are presented.
In the FMCG logistics, two different trends for assigning
case/box sizes to goods in general can be observed. On the
one hand, there is the pragmatic way of assigning the
‘‘best-ﬁtting’’ case from a given pool to the goods. Reasons
to use this pragmatic way are manifold and seem convincing at ﬁrst sight. There are, for example, cost savings
through avoiding extensive calculations by the use of
software and a high volume usage per case. In a recent
paper, Meller and Kimberly presented a current scenario
where the average utilization for carton boxes is 88.9 % for
a company using 258 different packaging cartons for 494
different products [13].
On the other hand, there are scientiﬁc approaches with
methods from operational research (OR) that try to assign
the best-ﬁtting case to a given set of products. Meller states
that ‘‘The problem in the literature most closely related to
this approach is the container loading problem (CLP). The
CLP is usually deﬁned as arranging rectangular items in
cartons with the objective to minimize the total wasted
space of the cartons, subject to loading constraints [14]. As
surveyed by Dyckhoff [15], the CLP is classiﬁed as the
three-dimensional (3D) rectangular packing problem in the
general cutting and packing problem literature’’ [16].
Meller states further that ‘‘There are a number of
approaches for categorizing the CLP that have been discussed in the literature [17]. One approach to classify the
CLP is based on carton quantity: whether packing a single
carton or packing multiple cartons. Multiple cartons are
necessary if a large quantity of goods need to be loaded
completely [18]; on the other hand, if some goods can be
left behind, only a single carton is involved in the problem
[15]. The CLP can also be differentiated based on the types
of items to be loaded: homogeneous items (where the items

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:8

are all identical in terms of their dimensions and orientation) or heterogeneous items (where different dimensions
of items are considered). Problems that fall in between
these two extremes are often referred to as weakly
heterogeneous cases [19]’’ [16].
Several papers have already examined the three-dimensional container loading problem (3D-CLP). According to Meller ‘‘Although these formulations provide
valuable insight on the CLP (see [20–25]), they assumed
that both a set of cartons with known dimensions and the
quantities of products are given. The models then select a
number of cartons to pack a given set of products. However, in this paper a model is proposed that can be used to
assign a set of standard modular containers to a variety of
products. In addition, the optimal quantity of items of each
product to be loaded in the associated modular container is
determined in the model’’ [16].
Meller’s research, which has been reported in [11, 12],
presents a modular container selection model that extends
the formulations proposed by Chen et al. [22]. The problem
they address was summarized as follows: ‘‘Assume that
different rectangular-shaped products in the current product line need to be packed and shipped. Each product has
a speciﬁc length, width, and height. Each product is currently packed in a carton with a speciﬁc length, width and
height with the carton containing a speciﬁc number of
items. Because in this paper M-boxes are used as our
handling containers, one can assume that products are of
sufﬁcient structural integrity to allow any orientation of the
items in a modular container and any packaging patterns
(this is not the case with products today, which have to
provide the structural integrity of the handling container
today). The formulation developed and presented by Meller
et al. [11, 12] assumes this as well’’ [16].
3.2 Current box design
Containers, boxes or more generally spoken loading devices and loading equipment are well treated in the literature
and guidelines (see as an example [26, 27] or [28]).
tenHompel [6] distinguishes, e.g. between three categories
of loading equipment which are load supporting, enclosing
or encapsulating.
For the M-box in the context of the FMCG, one has to
distinguish between two categories of containers: the ﬁrst
category refers to ‘‘handling containers’’. Examples of
handling containers today are cartons, cases, boxes and
pallets. They are used to cover the product or to provide
means to handle products together as a unit load. (Note that
for most products today, the product itself provides the
structural integrity of the handling containers, as opposed
to the handling containers). The second category refers to
train wagons and truck trailers used to transport handling
containers. Unlike with handling containers, transportation
containers must provide the structural integrity of the load
and must be able to resist the elements [16].
With the advent of the PI, its inventors assume that
transportation containers will remain relatively unchanged.
Perhaps, over time, their dimensions will be modiﬁed so as
to synchronize them over a variety of modalities (e.g. ship,
ISO container, rail, truck). However, it is an assumption
that in a future vision with the PI, handling containers will
be reduced to modular containers and unit loads that are
built out of multiple modular containers [16]. Taking now a
closer look on currently used handling containers in FMCG
industries, one can observe many different sizes, features
and characteristics. The following categorization resumes
from a comprehensive policy and market analysis as part of
the MODULUSHCA project [29] (see Fig. 1). The categorization especially regards small- and medium-sized
boxes (following the distinction in chapter 2).
Clustering the features and characteristics in groups of
requirements linked/related together, functional groups are
used to distinguish between the existing boxes. The boxes
might have [29]:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Folding/collapsible capabilities
Stacking capabilities
Interlocking capabilities
Product-box interacting capabilities
Strength capabilities
Durability capabilities
Cleaning capabilities
Identiﬁcation capabilities
Handling capabilities

The comprehensive policy and market analysis shows
that there are already a lot of different transport boxes on

Page 5 of 22 8

the market meeting most of the essential requirements for
the PI containers. Many boxes are modular, foldable,
stackable, etc., but none of them has an interlocking system
meeting the demands of the PI vision.
3.3 Current methods for loading trucks
For shipping goods, pallets, boxes or unit loads have to be
positioned on trucks. Therefore, restrictions are speciﬁed
by law and guidelines (e.g. VDI 2700 [30, 31] or the
Austrian KFG § 4 Abs. 9a). These law and guidelines that
vary from country to country describe, e.g. the maximum
weight, the centre of mass, the axle load or bearing load.
The technical restrictions mainly determine the maximum
load a box has to withstand and the stability of the unit
load. The stability of a unit load is according to BGR234 of
2006 [32] deﬁned as the ratio between the moment of
tilting which is generated by an applied force and the
moment of stability. Besides further requirements result
from the practical and pragmatic aspects of the packing,
shipping and the loading process [33]. Examples are:
•

•

The streets are slightly tilted to the left in order to
facilitate the drain off water. Therefore, the centre of
mass of the load has to be adjusted according to
minimize the abrasion of tires.
When facing icy or wet road conditions, the axle load
of the driving axle should be sufﬁcient.

As outlined before in chapter 3.1, multiple algorithms
exist to solve the mixed-integer optimization problem and
therefore the bin packing problem. Bin packing means
assigning a given number of deﬁned items to load units by
minimizing the number of these units and is considered as a
combinatorial problem. For the PI-loading process within
the PI logistics (see chapter 2), this would mean to pack a
deﬁned number of unit loads on trucks in order the number

Fig. 1 Clustering of the existing boxes [29]

branch and bound algorithm [34]) and commercially
available products like [35] are currently used. As a collateral market analysis in the MODULUSHCA project
shows, there are no commercial (software) products which
take the law, guidelines and technical restrictions altogether into account.

4 Identiﬁed research gaps
To realize the vision of the PI, the ﬁelds of investigation
are manifold. Comparing the overall goals for the PI containers and the derived three main research questions (described in chapter 2) with the state of the art (described in
chapter 3) leads to the following research gaps (summarized in Fig. 2):
4.1 Sizing
In today’s SC for FMCG, the diversity of brands and types
of products with various sizes and weights leads to a nearly
inﬁnite range of different sizes of carton boxes. Building
unit loads with such a high variance of cases is rather
complicated and leads to inefﬁcient space utilization at the
pallet level and as a consequence also on a truck level.
Therefore, the ﬁrst problem to solve can be stated
accordingly: for the FMCG market, determine the set of
modular container dimensions that would balance the
desire to decrease the number of options, while at the same
time not overly restrict options, because to do so will result
in boxes that are less full than today. In doing so with the
currently outlined methods in chapter 3.1, one has to
consider that FMCG that are shipped today have speciﬁc
item dimensions and are shipped in speciﬁc quantities of
items per handling container.

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:8

4.2 Design
After deﬁning the sizes for the M-box, the next step is to
develop a clear functional speciﬁcation of logistics containers in FMCG logistics based on technical restrictions
and box functions from SC demands. As already stated in
chapter 3.2, none of the existing boxes meets the overall
demands of the PI vision. Therefore, the developed functional speciﬁcation forms the starting point of a methodological approach to develop, engineering design and
prototype the M-box.
4.3 Loading
In the future PI scenario, the predominant transport will be
in between PI hubs. Therefore, a PI-loading process within
the PI logistics has to be applied to position the unit loads
built out of M- or PI-boxes so that the number of used
trailers becomes a minimum. Furthermore, there are several restrictions which are speciﬁed by law and guidelines
to consider as outlined in chapter 3.3. As stated before, no
commercial (software) products which take the law,
guidelines and technical restrictions altogether into account
exist to support the PI-loading process.

5 Methodological approach
Before focusing on the different methods in the three layers, a general approach has to be developed to get an honest
illustration of a future PI scenario. To transfer the current
situation virtually to the PI scenario, the method outlined in
Fig. 3 is used.
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.
Fig. 2 Summarizing the identiﬁed research gaps

123

Based on the shipment data of the MODULUSHCA
project partner P&G, trailers are identiﬁed which ship
goods now. This number of trailers is the reference to
compare the M-box scenario with.
The monthly shipped items in these trailers are
identiﬁed.
For each of these items, the best-ﬁtting M-box
dimension out of the available sizes gets determined.
The items in an M-box were ±25 % the number of
items allowed in the current case. This process gets
done with a computerized algorithm [11, 12].
The number and type of the used M-boxes and also
their speciﬁcations like weight and centre of mass are
now known. Based on these data, the unit loads can be
built.
The stability of the unit loads is calculated to assure

Fig. 3 V-model [8]

6.

Afterwards, these unit loads get distributed to trailers
to calculate the number of necessary trailers. The last
step of this is to place the unit loads on the trailers so
that restrictions of law (e.g. maximum and minimum
axle load) and ‘‘physics’’ (e.g. desired centre of mass
on trailer) are respected.
After this step, the trailers that are used in the current
situation can be compared to the number of trailers in
the future by using the M-boxes. Note that today
trailers run from the plant to different locations. In the
PI, the trailers would be shipped from the plant to a PI
hub and then consolidation will be used along a pointto-point hub network.

5.1 Used methods for sizing M-boxes
One of the ﬁrst decisions to be made in specifying a set of
modular containers is the ‘‘platform’’ for the set. That is, if
one deﬁnes the platform’s width W, depth D and height H,
then the possible dimensions of containers that are modular
to the platform can be chosen. At the outset, one considers
the European trailer dimensions and the current euro pallet
dimension. As the dimensions of the euro pallet are 0.8 m
by 1.2 m and the inside dimensions of the Euro trailer are
2.44 m wide by 13.40 m deep by 2.5 m tall, the modular
M-box platform can be 0.8 m (W) by 1.2 m (D) by 2.4 m
(H). Note that it is also considered a platform of
1.2 m 9 1.2 m 9 2.4 m and other platforms based on the
international shipping container. However, such a footprint
would not utilize the current European trailer as well as the
rectangular 0.8 m 9 1.2 m footprint. To further reﬁne this,
all three dimensions (0.8, 1.2 and 2.4 m) are divided by 1,

2, 3, …, as long as the result was greater than or equal to
0.1 m. These dimensions would be considered exterior
dimension standards. Then, based on many discussions, all
combinations of x, y, z that were not integer at the mm level
(that is, eliminating an x value of 266.7 mm formed by
dividing W by 3 because 266.7 is not an integer) were
eliminated, including a few other values (e.g. y = 150 mm,
and z = 160, 150 mm). The reduced set of modular container dimensions is presented in Fig. 4 [16].
With this platform presented in Fig. 4, the total possible
number of M-boxes would be 440. These 440 different
sizes of boxes can be considered to be a platform for further development and as a starting point for the recommended set of pooled containers. They are recommended
by the MODULUSHCA consortium to maintain container
fullness as much as possible and to improve overall utilization at the unit load level. However, decisions around
ﬁnal platform selection will be iterative, subject to cost,
industry and retailer support and also subject to the future
development of the products in the FMCG industry.
Moreover, in addition to the beneﬁts of a modular platform,
there are beneﬁts that can result if a small number of
dimension combinations are in use in an asset pooling
arrangement.
5.2 Used methods for the M-box design
To get aware of the relevant steps in the engineering
design process of the M-box, it is necessary to introduce
the methodology. For the M-box development and design
process, the systematic approach of VDI 2221 [36] and
VDI 2222 [37] is used. This systematic approach deals


Fig. 4 Modular platform with
440 different M-box dimensions
[16]

Fig. 5 Different phases of the VDI 2222 applied to the development process for the M-box design, oriented on [37]

with the universal and non-sector-speciﬁc principles of
the methodological engineering design and deﬁnes process steps after a common logic and practicality. Through
a systematic and methodological approach, the often
random outcomes of an engineering design process are

123

based on arguments and hence easy to compare, measure
and lead to results more quickly. The process is divided
in four different phases, and Fig. 5 shows the different
phases applied on the development process for the M-box
because the modular boxes are geometrically familiar. This
enables, by less change management effort, an efﬁcient
design of not only one M-box but the whole set of modular
boxes up to the suggested 440 different sizes (Fig. 4).
A key enabler of this work is to develop a functional
speciﬁcation for the modular units. To do this requires a
better understanding of cross-industry and sector views, of
the type of functionality that is desirable. Insight into what
traits are considered most important via appropriate
stakeholder input enables identiﬁcation and prioritization
of potential design features. In order to capture as many of
stakeholder views as possible from which to deﬁne the
suite of functionality requirements, an e-survey is used to
solicit input. The survey is based on a map of ‘‘typical’’ SC
interactions between manufacturing sites, distribution
centres, co-packing sites and retail outlets. These SC
interactions are based on scenarios provided by a storybook
approach (a particular example is outlined in Fig. 6) which
is a pragmatic way to bring experts in logistics and experts
in engineering into line. This approach focuses on particular aspects of the SC and on ﬁve focus areas [16]:
•
•

Reuse
Repair

Page 9 of 22 8

•
•
•

Recycle
Reach (also beyond EU)
Ergonomics

The aim of this is to raise key questions around what the
M-boxes should look like, how they may work and better
understand how people should interact with them.
5.3 Used methods for loading M-boxes
Functions that are mainly inﬂuenced by the logistics processes (packing, loading and shipping) are identiﬁed by
MODULUSHCA scenario simulations [39]. Therefore, two
relevant ‘‘logistic processes’’ are identiﬁed which are
important for the box functionality and mainly inﬂuenced
by technical restriction:
1.
2.

Building unit loads out of M-boxes.
Allocation of the unit loads on the trailer.

A limiting constraint for this ﬁrst realization is that each
unit load is built out of M-boxes of the same size that are
ﬁlled with the same product. This leads to the fact that for
each type of M-box, the packing pattern for the unit load is
previously ﬁxed. So it is necessary to control if the unit
load fulﬁls all restrictions of law and if it fulﬁls all

Fig. 6 Storybook to sketch SC interactions for the survey [16]


Fig. 7 Process of packing,
loading and shipping analysis
[33]

technical speciﬁcations to be shipped. To meet technical
restrictions for the complete shipping process, a bin
packing algorithm and an algorithm to position the different unit loads on a truck are used [16, 33].
One of the major points for the unit load analysis (process
step 1 in Fig. 7) is the stability of the unit load which is
important for the M-box design. Therefore, the packing
pattern of the unit load is analysed by taking into account the
position of each M-box in the unit load, net weight of the

123

boxes, payload in the boxes, centre of mass of each box and a
potential applied external force. The result of this calculation
is a ratio S, which is built by the moment of stability divided
by the tilting moment (see Fig. 8). Due to the fact that all
M-boxes are interlocked, the unit load can be seen as one unit
and the calculation guideline from BGR234 of 2006 [32] can
be adapted to the equation described in Fig. 8. Additional
loads from transportation dynamics, as outlined in [30], are

Fig. 8 Forces on unit load and
stability [8]

To ship the unit loads, they have to be positioned on
trailers. Based on the facts that the number of possibilities
to position the n unit loads increases with n! and the
problem is NP complete [34], the second logistic process
‘‘Allocation of the unit loads on the trailer’’ was split up in
two sub-processes (process step 2 and 3 in Fig. 7). The ﬁrst
sub-process distributes the unit loads to trailers so that the
number of trailers becomes a minimum. In literature, this is
also known as ‘‘2D-vector packing’’. The second sub-process places the unit loads on the trailer on their precise
position in a way that the common requirements (described
in chapter 3.3) like maximum and minimum axle load or
bearing load of the trailer are fulﬁlled.
As pointed out in chapter 1, the main focus of this
document is on the engineering design of the M-box. The
detailed mathematical description behind the used methods
for loading the M-boxes can be seen in [8, 33].

6 Findings and results
6.1 Results for sizing M-boxes
A test scenario data set of 1186 different products, all
currently shipped by the consortium member P&G, is used
to calculate the optimum set of M-boxes for this particular
data set. This diverse and representative portfolio is used to
drive the optimization and efﬁcient trailer loading by
considering mixed unit loads. In order to develop an
affordable and effective solution for MODULUSHCA that
can be implemented in the FMCG market and adequately
leverage the beneﬁts of pooling, only ﬁve (5) different sizes
of the M-box are presented as a ﬁrst step in Table 2 (shown
as outer M-box dimensions). These ﬁve different sizes can
be considered as a recommendation for a future build, still
keeping in mind that engineering issues that will have an


Table 2 Proposed outer
dimensions for the M-box [8]

impact on the sizes and shape of the M-box will be
addressed and resolved in the design stage. Furthermore,
the test runs with the prototypes within the scope of the
MODULUSHCA project and the lessons learned from it
will also have inﬂuence on the ﬁnal set of M-boxes (more
than ﬁve sizes can be included).
While this selection is not directly modular with each
other, they are with the modular platform
(1.2 m 9 0.8 m 9 2.4 m) presented in chapter 5.1
(Fig. 4). Moreover, it is still possible to build loads as long
as they are modular to the unit load level and additionally it
is possible to build unit loads on a different unit load
platform. The ﬁve sizes chosen are still compatible to the
needs of a modern pooling business model. A future option
is to build the boxes not as a rigid box but out of panels.
This means that a panel can be used as a side panel, bottom
panel or top panel and allows building many different box
sizes out of less different panels (see chapter 7). For the
MODULUSHCA project, the consortium decided to put

123

the focus on rigid boxes which are compatible with today’s
SC systems. In order to show how a future scenario can
look like the innovative idea of panels will be further
developed.
To identify the impact of a future PI scenario and to
highlight the difference in performance to the current situation (using cardboards and pallets), the general approach
which is described in chapter 5 (Fig. 3) is used. For each of
the items in the test scenario, the best-ﬁtting M-box
dimension out of the available sizes gets determined (note
that not all available sizes have to be chosen for the given
set of items). This process is done with a computerized
algorithm from literature as described in chapter 3.1. The
results of the test scenario are presented in Table 3.
As the results of the test scenario show the truck fullness, M-box utilization depends strongly on the number of
used box sizes. This leads to the fact that the number of
used trailers signiﬁcantly decreases (about 22 %) with the

different box sizes. Modelling the key performance indicators (KPI) and solutions for operational interconnectivity
in FMCG logistics has shown that the whole SC must be
taken into account and that handling costs are the major
part of logistics costs. The use of M-boxes is then very
useful for reducing handling costs and a more efﬁcient way
to ship goods. The cost impacts, beneﬁts or on-costs of the
M-box solutions will be driven not only by improvements
enabled by better vehicle utilization, but also by
improvements in unit, case and load handling efﬁciency
and physical storage [39] (further information on cost–
beneﬁts see [39]).

Besides the impact of a future PI scenario, the results of
the test scenario illustrate the dilemma in the current
logistics system based on carton-based containments where
the product is required to provide much of the structural
integrity of the unit load. Actually, nearly full carton cases
of products (above 85 % with nearly unlimited range of
carton case sizes) lead to only 70 % full unit loads, because
stacking carton boxes does not allow same maximum
heights than M-boxes. This instance and the derived
requirements of the SC lead to the results summarized in
Table 3. These 81 % full unit loads, with a much smaller
number of box sizes than actual carton case sizes, can be

Table 3 Truck fullness results [29]
Item utilization of the
M-box’s volume (%)

M-box utilization of the unit
loads volume (%)

Item utilization of the
unit load (%)

Number of
trailers used

Difference to the
current situation (%)

Five M-boxes

56

100

56

745

5

Nine M-boxes

63

100

63

652

-8

Full set (155
out of 440)

81

100

81

549

-22.5

Fig. 9 Key functions of the
M-box [8]

idea, besides 22,5 % less trailers.
6.2 Results for the M-box design
A key enabler of this work is to develop a functional speciﬁcation for the modular units. The ﬁrst step of the presented
methodology is the clariﬁcation of the task (see Fig. 5). As
described in chapter 5.2, an e-survey based on scenarios
provided by a storybook approach is used to identify and
prioritize potential design features for the M-box. The result
of the survey is to deﬁne ‘‘must have’’, ‘‘nice to have’’ and
‘‘not required’’ functionality characteristic. The must have
characteristics are then used to derive the main functions of
the M-box and also requirements for the design. These
functions for the M-box used in the PI vision are clustered to
main functions and are listed below in Fig. 9.
Following the different phases of the VDI 2222 [37] (as
described in Fig. 5), the next development phase is

Fig. 10 Different steps in the conceptual design: a ﬁnding solution
principles; b assessment of the solution principles according to Pahl/
Beitz [40]; c developing solutions through TRIZ and brainstorming;

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:8

conceptual design. Since conceptual design uses the
methodological approach of VDI 2221 [36], the starting
point is to investigate different physical effects to ﬁnd
possible solutions principles for each of the key functions.
To further assess the different principles and to focus further developing work on the most promising solution, they
are evaluated following the methodology of Pahl/Beitz [40]
by different criteria:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Compliance with the overall task
Fulﬁls demand of the speciﬁcation
Realizable in principles
Within permissible costs
Incorporates direct safety measures
Preferred by designer’s company

In the next steps, developing tools like the TRIZ method
[41] and brainstorming in a larger team helped to ﬁnd more
detailed solutions to realize the functions. The developed
solutions for each of the key functions are then summarized

d morphological box with different solution variations; e value beneﬁt
box’’), and different solution variations for the M-box
design are selected. Before deciding on the ﬁrst

Fig. 11 Virtual development process and engineering tools [8]

Page 15 of 22 8

embodiment design to be realized, the selected solution
variations are assessed with a value beneﬁt analysis and a
failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA). The different
steps of these design phases are brieﬂy shown in Fig. 10.
More details can be seen in [16, 29].
As outlined in chapter 3.2, there are already a lot of different transport boxes on the market meeting most of the
essential requirements for the PI containers. Many boxes are
modular, foldable, stackable, etc., but none of them has an
interlocking system meeting the demands of the PI vision.
Therefore, the MODULUSHCA consortium decided to
further focus on the development of the interlocking mechanism to pave the way for the realization of the PI. For the
innovative interlocking mechanism, a male/female system
situated on top and at the bottom of each box is chosen, due to
comprehensive and broad assessment results.
Steps 3 and 4 of the methodology presented in Fig. 5 are
embodiment design and detail design. Therefore, various
virtual methods like CAD and CAE support the methodical
engineering process (shown in Fig. 11).
During this virtual development process, iteration take
place after each important development step. Structural
analysis with ﬁnite element methods (FEM and FEA) and
multi-body dynamics (MBD) calculations is used to model
and simulate the behaviour of the M-box virtually. After
the ﬁrst development step, the structural strength of the
M-box is proofed via FEA (see Fig. 12). This provides
decisions about the material choices and other design
details to guarantee the required stiffness and strength of
the M-box. In engineering, the proposed 3D-printing
material is roughly new and crucial FEA with CAE provides valuable insights and a more streamlined design

Fig. 12 Results of M-box’s FEA [42]


process than laboratory testing in this early stage. The
presented results in Fig. 12 show the maximum principal
stress and displacement of the M-box prototype in a virtual
test scenario in which the lowest box of a unit load is
charged. The force applied in FEA corresponds to average
loading density of 500 kg/m3 (note that according to the
BGR234 of 2006 [32], a safety factor of 2 has to be taken
into account) and depicts that the material choices and
design details are suitable to cope with the maximum load
as required in the test scenario. Further details can be seen
in [42].
For the interlocking mechanism, multi-body dynamics
analyses are carried out to calculate the load on speciﬁc
components of the mechanism in different scenarios during
its lifetime. This step is necessary to reach adequate
dimensioning of the design parts according to the appearing loads. This leads to minimization of space, secure
operation and reduction in wear.
In order to proof the PI scenario (further described in
chapter 7), the MODULUSHCA consortium decided to
prototype several M-boxes in two different sizes (see KPIs
in Table 4). After several iterations in the design process
(see also [29]), the drafts are evolved to ﬁrst prototype
design as seen in Fig. 13.
To proof the PI scenario, the focus of the ﬁrst prototype
is on how to combine the units with the interlocking
mechanism. Therefore, it does not fulﬁl all the functions

Table 4 KPIs of the M-box prototypes
Small M-box

Large M-box

Outer dimensions (mm)

300 9 400 9 300

400 9 600 9 400

Inner dimensions (mm)

270 9 360 9 275

370 9 560 9 375

Volume usage (%)

74.25

80.94

Weight (kg)

2.9

5.7

Fig. 13 Small M-box prototype design in CAD

123

and requirements presented in Fig. 9. As already stated
before, the innovative interlocking mechanism is realized
with a male/female system situated on top and at the bottom of each box. To build a unit load, the different
M-boxes have to be positioned on top of each other in a
criss-cross packing pattern. To activate or deactivate the
interlocking mechanism, the lever (see detail B in Fig. 14)
that is positioned at the top of the M-box has to be turned.
Turning this lever drives a sliding sheet positioned in the
double ﬂoor of the M-box (see detail C in Fig. 14) via a
rope/cable which operates in one of the side wall. The
translational movement of the sliding plate is then converted to a rotational movement of rotating plates positioned underneath. If one M-box is positioned on top of
another, the rotating plates then gear into the top panel of
the M-box underneath. The rotating plates are positioned in
a modular distance of 100 mm which allows the M-boxes
to overlap, the building of unit loads with different-sized
M-boxes and turning the M-boxes by 90°. Using a handle
which is positioned at the top of the M-box to activate or
deactivate the interlocking mechanism is on the one hand a
matter of safety and on the other hand a matter of accessibility. If one M-box is positioned on top of another, the
mechanism cannot be deactivated by accident and is selfsecured. As the FMEA points out, the accidentally
unlocking of connected boxes is a severe injury risk.
Therefore, the lever is either always covered by a box on
top or can be ﬁxed if there is no box on top and thus always
secured. On the other hand, if one M-box is positioned in
the middle of the top layer of a unit load, it is still possible
to access the handle in contrary if the handle would be
positioned at the bottom of the M-box. Further details can
be seen in [29].
The developed mechanism and the current manual
movement to interconnect the M-boxes can be seen as the
basis for future developments to integrate the M-boxes in
fully automated supply chains. For future use, the
mechanical system ‘‘handle-rope-sliding plate’’ can be
replaced by automated actuators which establish the
interconnection by rotating the discs to interlock the units.
With an appropriate energy supply and intelligence, the
M-box will then be able to navigate autonomously through
future PI-supply networks. A survey on ergonomics and
handling capabilities which was part of the MODULUSHCA project revealed that a M-box without additional handles could cause problems. Lifting the box by
grasping the structure on the side panels will lead to direct
pressure on the nerves and/or blood vessels of the ﬁngertips. This increases the risk of discomfort and injury.
Furthermore, the survey pointed out that positioning the
handles on the long side of the box would be disadvantageous. In order to keep the centre of gravity closer to the

Fig. 14 Interlocking mechanism of the M-box

of the box (the one housing the interlocking mechanism).
In order to solve these problems and assure a handling of
the boxes which meets the demands of ergonomics, additional handles are proposed (see [42]). They can be positioned on top of the M-boxes (like any other M-box) and
use the same principles to interlock as it was explained
early in this section (rotating plates gear into the top panel
of the M-box).
In order to establish a starting point for functional tests
and design evolution, the prototypes are produced with the
3D printing technology stereolithography (STL) [43] (see
Figs. 15, 16). The KPIs for the produced prototypes are
described in Table 4.
The next step in a future design process would be to
improve the design according to functional test results. One
major step is to increase the volume usage up to a range of
80 % for the small M-box and 85 % for the large M-box.
Furthermore, the design ought to include more functions
like a possibility to identify the content, access to the
products not only from the top but also from the nonfunctional side panels, ways to secure the M-box and better
ergonomic handling which are core functions of the whole
PI idea (see Fig. 9).
6.3 Results for loading M-boxes
The aim of the methodology described in chapter 5.3 is to
allocate the unit loads built out of M-boxes on each single
trailer on their speciﬁc position. Therefore, two relevant

Fig. 15 Physical prototype of the small M-box

‘‘logistic processes’’ in the PI packing are identiﬁed which
are important for the box functionality and mainly inﬂuenced by technical restriction:
1.
2.

Building unit loads out of M-boxes.
Allocation of the unit loads on the trailer.

These logistic processes are part of the general approach
to identify the overall impact of a future PI scenario which
is described in chapter 5 (Fig. 3). Therefore, the difference
in performance to the current situation using cardboards
and pallets can be seen in Sect. 6.1, Table 3.

based on the ﬁndings in the sizing process (see chapter 6.1) are
used. The restriction of law by the road trafﬁc act in Germany
and further technical restrictions deﬁning the boundaries outlined
in Sect. 3.3 are considered in this example. Figure 17 shows a
signiﬁcant result of the algorithm and depicts the boundaries,
centre of mass, axle load and bearing load. The different columns
refer to the weight of a unit load placed on a speciﬁc position.

7 Conclusion and outlook
The PI aims to bring maximum ﬂexibility and interconnectivity to the SC, and the M-boxes are a key element of
this intention. Starting the design process, it was obvious

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:8

that the gap between the SC in the PI vision and the SC
system today will lead to two fundamentally different ways
to build and design a modular box (see chapter 6.2):
1.
2.

Panels mean modular panels which can be used as a top
panel, bottom panel or side panel with no limitation to
orientation. Using such modular panels will allow building
many different boxes and using less different panels (an
example is outlined in Fig. 18) and as a consequence will
bring more ﬂexibility to the SC system.
This future scenario, allowing many different rigid
boxes or detachable boxes built out of panels in the SCs,
can raise doubts about the efﬁciency and feasibility of
pooling so many different boxes or parts and can lead to
logistical and ﬁnancial problems and obstacles. Challenges
to overcome will be:
•
•
•
•

Fig. 16 Interlocked part of a unit load comprising small and large
M-box prototypes

Fig. 17 Balanced trailer loading [8]

123

Rigid boxes—as described in chapter 6.2
Boxes built out of panels:

In the complexities of the modern SC keeping components together will be a huge logistical challenge.
As soon as a part of a product is detached, it is at a risk
of being lost and also damaged.
A successful pooling business is based on having the right
product available at the right location at the right time.
One way to overcome this would be to budget the
additional costs in oversupplying the network to
overcome the risk of component shortage.

As the PI Initiative and the MODULUSHCA concept
aim to change the whole SC and the way it works, the
consortium strongly believes that these obstacles are
manageable in the future. Therefore, a future task within
the MODULUSHCA project will be to further develop the
innovative concept of modular boxes built out of modular
panels and to proof the overall assumptions of the PI with

Fig. 18 M-box built out of modular panels [42]: a ﬁrst prototype design; b panel–panel-locking system actuation; c M-boxes built out of panels
interlocked with additional connectors; d planar—locked panels in order to form a larger panel

The ﬁrst ‘‘physical’’ test run of MODULUSHCA will
take place in a closed inter-site SC of one of the consortium
partner’s customization centre. In this ﬁrst logistics pilot,
the developed M-boxes will replace pallets and cases that
are currently used for the intra-/inter-site transportation.
The aim is to scale this up to an open interconnected network beyond the company boundaries at later stage
accomplishing the scope of this project. The pilot will
consist on introducing some M-boxes into the current ﬂow
of goods of a company evaluating and monitoring the
impact that the new system will have on people’s safety,
product security (decreased damage and traceability),
processes and information ﬂows. The M-boxes will be
assessed against the following KPIs:
•
•
•
•

Ergonomics (weight, grip handle)
Quality assurance (cleanability, package and product
damage)
Safety (ﬁre protection)
Others

and should demonstrate value creation capabilities. An
inter-site transportation pilot will be performed in order to
validate vehicle loading optimization, stackability, stability, 24’’ drop test, shaker table, inclined conveyor or even
ISTA 3E standard for shipping of full product pallets.
The second ‘‘physical’’ test run will use one of the
consortium partner’s distribution networks. It will demonstrate the handling of the new information formats as well
as analyse the handling M-boxes in the transhipment processes, together with testing the sensor system and communication device (not part of this article, see [4]) that will
be developed. The demonstration will make an effort to
integrate and test the algorithm about collaborative
scheduling and routing for interconnected logistics. These
tests use an existing physical and/or digital infrastructure of
a logistics service provider. Special interest will be the
operational fulﬁlment of the reversed logistics (empty
packaging and returned goods) during normal deliveries.
Optimizations in combining reversed logistics with operational deliveries could prove efﬁcient deployment of the

validate the KPIs of handling, (un)loading, reversed
logistics, traceability, utilization of truck capacity, stackability and robustness.
Initially, the project group expects increased load efﬁciency thanks to the interconnectibility of the M-boxes,
allowing better space utilization in storage and in transport.
Once the M-boxes will become a standard, there will be
even more efﬁciencies as the FMCG companies will naturally converge towards products and packages designs that
maximize the weight and volume ﬁll of the boxes themselves. The main beneﬁts out of the test runs in a closed
inter-site SC demonstration and in distribution networks are:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Greatly reduced amount of carton versus what is in use
today
Increased load efﬁciency
Improved both safety and security issues all along the
SC
Increase in load efﬁciency; use of available box/trailer
capacity
Overall decrease in the transport kilometres and
reduction of CO2
Improved handling during loading and unloading
Reversed logistics versus operational deliveries
Traceability

Besides all necessary OR and logistic considerations
within the PI idea, this work shows obviously that engineering design and ‘‘physical objects’’ are essential contributors to the overall goals identiﬁed.
The methodological and creative development of 3Dprinted prototypes brought valuable insight in design,
handling and identiﬁed further research questions. Besides
the scientiﬁc approach in box design, the economic and
cost-efﬁcient production in larger quantities is a major
challenge for the loading device industry. Despite using
completely different product methods in the future production of the M-boxes, the presented ﬁndings in engineering design regarding the different aspects (the three
layers) can be reused efﬁciently.
