1. Introduction
Sooner or later, countries enjoying a sustained growth in their national incomes get confronted
with the increasing healthcare costs caused by the spread of non-communicable diseases, such as
obesity, cancer, hypertension, and heart dysfunctions [1–4]. The paradoxical positive relationship
between economic welfare, food risks, and healthcare costs has already been pointed out by researchers
from different ﬁelds as well as by various international organizations [5] (p. 25), [6–9].
This relationship appears to be especially pronounced in developed counties. For example, in the
USA, healthcare costs have been rising faster than national or personal income for more than 40 years [2]
(p. 125). In low- and middle-income countries, these costs are much lower but still positively correlated
with the level of economic development measured in terms of national income and urbanization [10–12].
Recent research shows that rising average incomes in emerging economies go along with the rise
in nutrition-related chronic diseases [1,3,13], especially for low-income population segments and
for urban children who are exposed to energy-dense foods that are low both in cost and nutritional
quality [14] (p. 124). Part of this problem is probably caused by the globalization of agriculture and the
increasing disconnection between the places of food production and consumption [15] (p. 3532), [16].
With “rapid shipping methods and the global distribution of food, serious public health risks and food
hazards in one part of the world can be transferred to other parts of the world in a matter of hours or a
few days” [17].
The World Health Organization (WHO) already speaks of the global transition from traditional
health risks (e.g., undernutrition and exposure to infections) to modern health risks (e.g., urban air
quality, changing dietary habits, and sedentary lifestyles) that cause the increase of chronic diseases
such as ischemia, cancer [7] (p. 9), and the “global obesity epidemic” [3]. Interestingly, the latter risks
not only coincide with the top ﬁve health risks of high-income countries and with the top four of the
middle-income countries, but also constitute the ﬁve leading causes of global mortality [7] (p. 11).
By contrast, the major health-related risk factors in low-income countries are still associated with
underweight, infectious diseases, and micronutrient deﬁciencies. Low fruit and vegetable intake is not
documented among the top ten risk factors in these countries, even though it is ranked seventh and
eighth for high- and middle-income countries, respectively [7] (pp. 9–11). The low-income population
segments appear to be most affected by food risks in any country. In high-income societies, however,
these risks are primarily induced by industrialization and take the form of overnutrition and attendant
healthcare costs [9] (p. 449).
The link between economic development and the changing nature of food risks is echoed by the
sociological theory of risk society developed by the German social theorist Ulrich Beck [18]. Mounting
a critique of modern industrial practices, Beck [19] (p. 216) argues that man-made risks, including
crime, pollution, and non-communicable diseases, are no longer a manageable side effect, but rather
the very products of the knowledge-intensive industrialized modernity: “the industrial pollution of
the environment and the destruction of nature, with their multifarious effects on the health and social
life of people [ . . . ] only arise in highly developed societies” [5] (p. 25).
There is indeed abundant evidence that food risks are especially high in advanced countries
that heavily rely on knowledge-intensive production and management practices [1–4,6–14].
While technological progress is supposed to make human life easier and safer [20] (pp. 2–3),
each technological advance—be it a standardized workﬂow, the use of herbicides, or nuclear
energy—unavoidably produces manifold risks which include car accidents, toxins in foodstuffs,
and nuclear threat [5] (p. 21), [21,22] (p. 319). The paradox of the technology-based modernity exposed
by Beck consists in the tendency of technologically induced risks to demand risk mitigation in the
form of ever-new technological solutions that in turn bring risks of their own. This circular cumulative
risk-technology causation creates a risk trap or treadmill [5] (p. 177), [19] (p. 218), [23].
The connection between technological development and the cumulative “race to the bottom” in
the nexus of risk and technological progress has also been noted by agricultural economists, though in
a different context. Willard Cochrane advanced the idea of the technological treadmill in his seminal
book “Farm Prices: Myth and Reality” originally published in 1958 [24]. Ever since, the technological,
or agricultural, treadmill has served as a paradigmatic point of departure for understanding structural
change in agriculture. Cochrane argued that the use of improved technologies in agriculture not
only increases productivity and reduces food costs, but also brings about the consolidation of land
and ownership that in turn calls for further technological improvements. All over the world, the
ongoing structural change in agriculture and the attendant increasing use of technological advances in
the organization of agricultural production lend credence to Cochrane’s theory. The present paper
contends, however, that the technological treadmill tells only a part of the story. Another part, which
is inspired by Beck’s risk treadmill, is that these technological advances reframe agricultural practices
and structures in such a way as to shift health risks and costs from producers through the processing
and retailing industries to consumers, but also to governments (e.g., via taxpayer-supported subsidies
to farmers), healthcare systems, and future generations [25] (p. 39). Given that the production of food
and the generation of food risks are inherently related, we argue that the shifting of risks and costs is
the endemic consequence of Cochrane’s technological treadmill. The present research note underscores
the role of industrialized agriculture (both, the farming sector and the vertically integrated agricultural
value chains) in shaping the interlinkages between both treadmills. To this end, we ﬁrst sketch out
the effects of Cochrane’s technological treadmill on the trend toward industrialized agriculture and
technologically induced risk shifting. Then, we present the central ideas of Beck’s risk society theory
and show their relation to the problem of food risks. The paper concludes by suggesting a research
agenda on the nature of the food risk society.
2. Cochrane’s Technological Treadmill
Cochrane’s theory of the agricultural, or technological, treadmill describes causal connections
between technological innovations, production cost, farm returns, competition, and farm size that
put the agricultural sector under permanent adjustment pressure [24]. The treadmill explains the
ongoing trend in global agriculture toward larger farms. Productivity improvements allow a relatively
small number of farmers, who are early adopters of new technology, to reap temporary proﬁts.
As more farmers adopt the new technology, overall production goes up and pushes prices down,
rendering further proﬁtable operations impossible. To stay in the market, farmers are forced to get
on the treadmill and adopt the next new technology. Those farmers who cannot do so, particularly
smaller farmers, incur above-average production costs that cannot be recovered at the lower output
prices. Non-adopting farmers thus face growing pressure to exit agriculture and to become passive
landowners [26]. In the latter case, the land resources of the non-adopters are often acquired by the
successful early adopters. Thus, it comes about that every turn of the technological treadmill leads to
an increasing farm size and a decreasing number of farms. The necessity for technological innovations
opens up new prospects primarily for larger producers, while producers that are smaller and less
efﬁcient are getting squeezed out of business.
Cochrane’s treadmill is traditionally believed to promote the interests of the industrial sector
of the economy by facilitating the inﬂow of labor force released from agriculture [27]. Consumers
are likewise supposed to beneﬁt from the decreasing costs, larger output, and improving quality of
food. The rising concerns over food risks suggest, however, that this belief may be overly optimistic.
Beneﬁts of improved production efﬁciency (e.g., low food prices or higher sanitary standards) are not
necessarily passed on to consumers and other concerned stakeholders. What is likely to be passed
on to these stakeholders is the food, health, and sustainability risks (e.g., overconsumption of sugar,
unbalanced diets, and biodiversity losses) associated with higher production efﬁciency. The coexistence
of the technological treadmill and the risk treadmill poses the issue of their possible interrelation. The
technological treadmill likely aggravates the risk treadmill discussed in the next section.
3. Beck’s Theory of Risk Society
Beck [5,18,19] makes his case for the risk society by tracing the evolution of manufactured risks
in the course of the transition from the industrial society (i.e., the ﬁrst modernity) to the risk society
(i.e., the second or reﬂexive modernity). The ﬁrst step of this transition, spanning the period from the
beginning of industrialization in the 17th century to the early 20th century, involves the systematic
and unintended production of manufactured risks, which, so the belief goes, can be institutionally
controlled. The possibility of their control rests on their amenability to mathematical assessment using
empirical knowledge of past accidents and probabilities [19] (pp. 215–216).
In the second step, the sheer diversity and complexity of multifarious risks render their
institutional control impossible. Absent the possibility of control, the monitoring and protective
institutions of the ﬁrst modernity turn into the legitimators of risks of the second modernity. The latter
risks are no longer simply “a matter of unintended consequences—the ‘toxin of the week’—but also
of the unintended consequences of unintended consequences in the institutions” [19] (p. 222). This
transformation of risks engenders the rise of organized irresponsibility, referring to the state of society
in which nobody is responsible for the origins and consequences of the catastrophic risks of the late
industrialization [18,19] (p. 224).
Unlike earlier tradition-based cultures, the second modernity is guided not by past events and
lessons learned from them, but primarily by future visions. This means that the perceptions of possible
threatening events in the future determine present-day thoughts and actions [19] (p. 214), [28]. In the
ﬁnancial world, these perceptions are exempliﬁed by the use of the so-called memory-less stochastic
(or Markov) processes for mathematical predictions of expected prices or derivative values. In the
more general societal context, the reversed time preference is evidenced by the attenuation of the
authority of traditions as well as by the “social surge of individualization” [5] (p. 87).
Consequently, within the second modernity, social stratiﬁcation is determined by the distribution
of risk rather than of wealth. Even the wealthiest individuals or groups may be unaware of
relevant risks and unable to avoid or shift them. In a sense, risk is more democratic than wealth
because of its equalizing effects [5] (p. 36), as well as more cosmopolitan in view of the advancing
globalization [15,16]. It is, however, noteworthy that the uneven distribution of risk does not
alter the relations of social inequality, but does change the distributional logic to that of social
“immi[z]eration” [5] (p. 50 ff.) and “a loss of social thinking” [5] (p. 25). In this line, Champlin and
Knoedler [29] document the reallocation of healthcare costs in the economically advanced countries
in response to the presumption of an individual’s own, rather than collective, responsibility for
his/her health.
Beck goes to great lengths in exposing the role of knowledge in the technologically advanced
second modernity. He even deﬁnes the very notion of risk in terms of a “peculiar synthesis of
knowledge and unawareness” [19] (p. 26), (cf. also [20] (p. 3)). Paradoxically, the growth of knowledge,
while giving a boost to industrialization, brings about new types of manufactured risks. It is interesting
that a similar story can be told about Cochrane’s treadmill. Technological knowledge does present
the source of technological improvements. Yet these improvements only allow agricultural producers
to stay in the same place, and only on the condition that they continue to participate in the race. In
both treadmills, the role of knowledge is ambivalent, and it is probably this ambivalence that explains
the wary public attitude toward scientiﬁc expertise in many contemporary debates, such as those on
genetically modiﬁed organisms and industrialized agriculture. The case for the ambivalent role of
knowledge is further reinforced by its growing control by industry (e.g., in terms of contract research),
which is not terribly sensitive to social and ecological consequences of technological innovations.
4. Connecting the Technological and Risk Treadmills
4.1. The Common Systems-Theoretic Core
Why is the juxtaposition of the two treadmills justiﬁed? Both of them conjure up the image of social
systems following their internal logic and imperatives while maintaining a precarious relationship to
their environment. Fanciful as it is, this image is at the core of Niklas Luhmann’s systems-theoretic
approach to social theory. Luhmann (e.g., [30]) saw the primary function of social systems in complexity
reduction, i.e., the relieving of individuals of the intolerable cognitive burdens related to processing
the complexity of the social and natural environment. While this function is valuable, it is not a
“free lunch” [31]. Social systems fulﬁll it at the cost of disregarding the environmental complexity,
thus exposing themselves, and the modern society as a whole, to multifarious environmental
risks. Valentinov [32] (p. 14) referred in this connection to the complexity-sustainability trade-off,
which “emerges because the growing systemic complexity entails the increasing risk that systems
develop insensitivity to those environmental conditions on which they critically depend”. If the
complexity-sustainability trade-off is accepted as a characterization of the endemic problems of
modernity, then it naturally follows that “the institutions of industrial society produce and legitimate
hazards which they cannot control” [19] (p. 223).
In the context of farming and agribusiness, the growth of the precarious civilizational complexity
takes the central form of the accumulation of scientiﬁc and technological knowledge (Figure 1).
Following Luhmann’s vision of functional differentiation as a key feature of modernity, this knowledge
can be plausibly taken to be processed by the economy as one of the function systems (along with
other systems such as science, law, and politics). The complexity-sustainability trade-off implies that
the building up of this intra-systemic complexity will likely result in the disregard of the critical
dependencies of the economic system on its societal and natural environment. It is this disregard that
brings farmers and consumers into a precarious condition described by the technological and risk
treadmills. With regard to farmers, the complexity-sustainability trade-off plays itself out through
the heightened dependence of agricultural production on the natural environment. Even though this
dependence is somewhat weakened by agricultural technologies, it still prevents at least some farmers
Sustainability 2016, 8, 584
5 of 10
from developing effective complexity reduction strategies. This is especially likely for small-scale
farmers who ﬁnd themselves unable to control their technological interdependence at a level that
laid bare by Cochrane [24]. The case of consumers is more straightforward. They are on the receiving
would be sufﬁcient for escaping collectively suboptimal outcomes laid bare by Cochrane [24]. The case
end of social costs generated by the economic system, with food risks being an increasingly
of consumers is more straightforward. They are on the receiving end of social costs generated by the
prominent cost component.
economic system, with food risks being an increasingly prominent cost component.

Figure 1. Connecting the technological and risk treadmills.
Figure 1. Connecting the technological and risk treadmills.

The common systems-theoretic nature of the two treadmills points to their moral implications.
implications.
Balmann et al. [33] have argued that the technological treadmill lowers the capacity of agricultural
technological
agricultural
producers, large-scale and small-scale alike, to assume corporate social responsibility, thus deepening
producers, large-scale and small-scale alike, to assume corporate social responsibility, thus
the cultural rifts between agriculture and broader broader society. The ongoing exacerbation of
deepening the cultural rifts between agriculture and society. The ongoing exacerbation of food
risks risks fits only wellwell into this pattern. At the same time, the treadmillmetaphor drives home
food ﬁts only too too into this pattern. At the same time, the treadmill metaphor drives
the point that any individual ascriptions of responsibility and blame would be contestable and
individual
unhelpful. In Beck’s words, “risk societies are characterized by the paradox of more and more
In Beck’s words, “risk societies are characterized by the paradox
environmental degradation—perceived and potential—coupled with an expansion of expansion of
degradation—perceived and potential—coupled with an environmental
law and regulation. and regulation. Yet, atno individual orno individual or institution seems to be
environmental law Yet, at the same time, the same time, institution seems to be held speciﬁcally
accountable for anything” [19] (p. 224). Valentinov224). Valentinov et al. [34] note in the “emergent”
held specifically accountable for anything” [19] (p. et al. [34] note in this connection this connection
character of modern moral of modern such asproblems, suchchange. of climatefew doubts that are few
the “emergent” character problems, moral that of climate as that There are change. There “global
warming is one of the most urgent andthe mostproblems facing humankind. Yet [ . . humankind. Yet
doubts that “global warming is one of serious urgent and serious problems facing . ] many people
neither understandneither understand nor accept the conclusions ofchange” [35] of climate change”
[…] many people nor accept the conclusions of the science of climate the science (p. 197). According
to Valentinov etAccording to Valentinov consequences of moral communication can be prevented
[35] (p. 197). al. [34], the dysfunctional et al. [34], the dysfunctional consequences of moral
only if it is framed by prevented only ifforms that take those “semantic forms that take account of
communication can be those “semantic it is framed by account of the emergent properties of the
economic and properties of the economic and other social systems” [34] (p. 1). and farming context,
the emergent other social systems” [34] (p. 1). It seems that, in the agribusiness It seems that, in the
the search for these forms context, expediently conducted on mayterrain staked out by the ongoing
agribusiness and farming may be the search for these forms the be expediently conducted on the
discourse between the so-called industrial and agrarian philosophies of agriculture. and agrarian
terrain staked out by the ongoing discourse between the so-called industrial
philosophies of agriculture.
4.2. The Two Philosophies of Agriculture and the Role of Agricultural Knowledge

4.2. The Two Philosophies ofthe industrial and agrarian philosophies of agriculture, lucidly presented
The debate between Agriculture and the Role of Agricultural Knowledge
in Thompson’s seminal book industrial and agrarianSustainability of agriculture, lucidly presented
The debate between the “The Agrarian Vision: philosophies and Environmental Ethics” [25],
focuses on those dimensions of agriculture that makeSustainabilityin civilizational, societal, cultural,
in Thompson’s seminal book “The Agrarian Vision: it signiﬁcant and Environmental Ethics” [25],
and even spiritual respects. At bottom, this is a debate onsignificant wecivilizational, societal, our lives
focuses on those dimensions of agriculture that make it “how can in make our society and cultural,
moreeven spiritual respects. At bottom, this context, this on “how can we make to the dual nature of
and sustainable?” [25] (p. 1). In the present is a debate debate draws attention our society and our
knowledge sustainable?” [25] (p. 1). In the treadmills under discussion. If the stance of the industrial
lives more whose dynamics is fueling both present context, this debate draws attention to the dual

nature of knowledge whose dynamics is fueling both treadmills under discussion. If the stance of the
industrial philosophy of agriculture is correct and agriculture indeed presents just another sector in
the industrial economy, then the ongoing generation of food risks and the systematic squeezing out
of small farms present implications that are not only unavoidable but also morally legitimate [25]
philosophy of agriculture is correct and agriculture indeed presents just another sector in the industrial
economy, then the ongoing generation of food risks and the systematic squeezing out of small farms
present implications that are not only unavoidable but also morally legitimate [25] (pp. 30 and 45), [36].
While acknowledging the built-in tendency of industrial agriculture to generate externalities, or social
costs in a more heterodox parlance, Thompson certainly does not deny its capacity to internalize at
least some of them. The more important point is that the continual generation of social costs, including
food risks, is hardwired into the economic logic of agricultural industrialization, which makes food
not only cheaper and more abundant but also equitably distributed [36,37] (pp. 137 and 177). The
social costs imposed on those small producers who are forced to exit agriculture are likewise justiﬁed
by the industrial philosophy in terms of beneﬁts of abundant labor supply to other sectors of the
economy [27].
Yet the industrial philosophy does not seem to hold an exhaustive view of agricultural knowledge.
It is true that knowledge makes both treadmills rotate not only faster but also with a greater reach. Still,
it seems no less clear that the improvement of social and ecological sustainability must likewise be
knowledge-intensive, even though the knowledge required for this purpose is of a different kind than
that which is prominent in the industrial philosophy. It is at this point that the agrarian philosophy of
agriculture makes a unique contribution by calling attention to “the larger wholes in which both human
relationships and exchanges with nature acquire their meaning” [25] (p. 38) and by emphasizing
the relation of agriculture to the moral values of sustainable development. The agrarian philosophy
encourages agricultural producers to “ﬁnd new ways to establish lines of feedback on our use and abuse
of natural resources”, with the hope that “these new ways must kick in well before the Malthusian
controls of famine and warfare” [25] (p. 194). Finding these ways is not only a moral but also an
intellectual task calling for an intimate knowledge of natural ecosystems, communities, and human
responsibilities for addressing risks of industrial agriculture.
Acting on this knowledge certainly calls for institutional forms that likely differ from those
implicated in the industrial philosophy. Balmann et al. [33] refer to civil society and corporate social
responsibility; Thompson [25] sees a role for community-supported agriculture, food activism, and
rural cooperatives [38–40]. The important point here is the acknowledgment that the agricultural
knowledge envisioned by the industrial philosophy of agriculture is not the only possible type of such
knowledge. Whatever they are, the moral values of agriculture and sustainable development sensitize
us to the need for acquiring those varieties of agricultural knowledge, which are not only helpful for
internalizing the existing risks and social costs but also for forestalling their emergence in the ﬁrst
place. The present agricultural knowledge is the foundation for the dominant industrial development
paradigm. If the post-industrial paradigm has any chance, it will be knowledge that would help it to
get off the ground.
5. Toward a Research Agenda
If the concerns about the link between Cochrane’s technological treadmill and Beck’s risk treadmill
are valid, these would justify a novel research program on how Cochrane’s treadmill is linked to new
ﬁnancial, ecological, and social risks that are increasingly shifted from producers toward consumers,
the state, and the healthcare system. According to Beck [5], these risks emerge through institutions that
regulate the production and control of food risks. Consequently, exploring the interlinkage between
the technological and risk treadmills challenges the popular belief that the technological treadmill
confers pure beneﬁts on food consumers. Instead, the embeddedness of the technological treadmill into
the encompassing risk treadmill entertains the possibility that the emerging agricultural technologies
promote risk shifting and thus turn food production partially to the consumer’s (and thus the broader
society’s) disadvantage [41]. The present research note proposes to address these issues by interlocking
the mechanisms of risk externalization and internalization within both treadmills (Figure 1).
Risk production within the technological treadmill is a consequence of economic actions and
strategic decisions of agricultural producers. Exploring risk production accordingly requires the
veriﬁcation of doubts that are occasionally cast upon the existence of this treadmill in the present-day
agriculture [42]. This task calls for analyzing the general trends in farm sizes and numbers, in the
share of population employed in agriculture, in the agricultural sector’s contribution to GDP, and
other relevant statistics of countries at different development levels. In the next step, risk shifting
from agricultural producers to consumers and the society at large can be detected by analyzing the
reasons for and the mechanisms of the correlation between land use (and modern agricultural practices)
with diets and nutritional content of foods, as well as the food and healthcare costs. One of those
mechanisms is suggested by the dependence of the corporate social responsibility practices on the
pace of the technological treadmill.
Risk shifting, however, is not necessarily linear and one-directional. Besides being the risk
externalization strategy of producers, risk shifting may be unintentionally accelerated by consumers’
neglect of their own responsibility for diets and health. This is especially true for consumers that enjoy
increasing income levels. Following Engel‘s Law, income growth should beneﬁt consumers by lowering
the proportion of income spent on food. In reality though, this process is often accompanied by a decline
of dietary balances and the related increase of food risks, especially for low-income populations [43].
Consumers’ contribution to the food risk treadmill must therefore be recognized as potentially
non-trivial and susceptible to the inﬂuence of civil society initiatives. Changes in dietary habits
can be accordingly investigated not only as the consequence of decreasing food prices and increasing
incomes but also as expressions of social reﬂexivity framed by a wide array of ideologies, ranging from
the politics of food self-sufﬁciency [44] to cultural reinforcements of agricultural myths [45].
Another area of inquiry is the potential trade-off between the health beneﬁts (such as the lower
germ load) and health risks (because of, e.g., toxic residues or reduced nutrient content). If this
trade-off exists, it can be detected by differentiating between the types of technological progress, which
can be purely technological, qualitative, or organizational.
Other crucial research issues shown in Figure 1 include the discourses on risk and on the
industrialization of agriculture. The distinction between these discourses goes back to Luhmann’s [46]
concept of second-order observation that is applicable to two types of risk observers: risk producers
and risk bearers. Risk discourse arises out of the tendency of the consumers’ perception of risks
to “determine thought and action” in the era of the risk society [19] (p. 213). This discourse deals
with the public and policy stance on issues related to agricultural industrialization (e.g., GMO or
large-scale farming) as reﬂected by ongoing political and media debates. For the “existence and
distribution of risks and hazards are mediated on principle through argument”—not, as in the case
of consumable goods, through market or evidence [5] (p. 27). A potentially provocative implication
of this conjecture is that the discourse on the industrialization of agriculture is seriously incomplete
if it leaves the risk treadmill out of account. Today, it becomes increasingly clear that the future of
agricultural industrialization is intertwined with the way both agricultural producers and consumers
respond to manufactured risks. Both of these forms of reﬂexivity inﬂuence the food risk treadmill
by interlocking growing knowledge with dietary choices and trends (e.g., from self-prepared meals
toward convenience foods) and by encouraging the scholarly analysis of relevant civil society initiatives
on the part of NGOs, food activists, and mass media.
Moreover, the study of the knowledge accumulation process may reveal a strong control of science
by the food industry. If this is the case, then civil society would need to mobilize itself in order to
overcome the consequences of ‘organized irresponsibility’ and to stand up to the challenge of the
reﬂexive handling of knowledge, social learning [47], and scientiﬁc expertise. This challenge can be
operationalized by studying the dynamics of the public spending on health, education, and science,
trends in contract research, the relationship between the share of population employed in agriculture,
and the quality of scientiﬁc expertise (cf. [27] (p. 104)), both in urban and rural areas. In addition,
much can be learned from studying the correlation between the level of education and modern food
health risks.
If successfully carried out, the proposed research agenda will have major impacts on international
development policies, science, and food ethics, especially in the middle-income transition economies,
such as Mexico, Russia, India, or Thailand [48]. These countries are approaching the bifurcation point
at which they must decide on whether to pattern their long-term development on the Western model.
In fact, already now, these countries resemble high- rather than low-income countries in terms of
dietary habits, industrialization level, socio-economic disparities, occurrence of non-communicable
diseases, and the share of healthcare costs borne by households [10]. The proposed research agenda
may alert decision-makers in these countries to the opportunity of avoiding excessive ties between
science and the agricultural and food industry. It is likely that the awareness of these problems may
advantageously inform those international policy recommendations that consider the transfer of
Western technological solutions as the most effective development assistance [11,49].
6. Concluding Remarks
Technological progress is generally supposed to make human life easier and safer. However,
the remarkable contribution of Ulrich Beck is in showing that this progress seldom occurs without
the unfortunate emergence of manufactured ﬁnancial, ecological, and social risks. While heterodox
economists have long been concerned with the social costs of economic development (e.g., [50]), Beck’s
risk society theory generalizes this problem setting to the risks induced by the modernization process
which transforms the entire society, including the non-economic spheres. As Beck showed, the societal
impacts of manufactured risks go as far as to restructure the very principle of social stratiﬁcation.
This principle is no longer wealth, but rather the ability to protect oneself from risks. Beck’s work
informs modern agricultural economics by pointing out the circular cumulative causation between
risks, knowledge, technology, and industrialization of agriculture.
This research note argues that in the contemporary agricultural context, this causation is further
radicalized by its interlocking with Cochrane’s technological treadmill which must be suspected of
shifting the growing share of food-related costs from producers towards environment, consumers, state,
and the healthcare system, a suspicion warranted by the positive relation between national economic
development and food risks. To validate this suspicion, the paper suggests a novel research program
that explores the shaping of food risks by modern farming practices and agricultural structural change.
