Introduction

Azerbaijan is one of the former Soviet republics that succeeded to become an actor of vital
importance today, due to its crucial location at the crossroads of Europe and Asia, but also thanks to
its energy wealth. Even though, Azerbaijani people are linked to the Turkic world by their languages,
to Iran by their Shi’a religion, and to the Caucasus by geography, they are considering themselves to
be Europeans by their way of thinking. Following the disintegration of USSR, this last perception has
become a defining element for Azerbaijan’s domestic and foreign policy.
Starting from these basic facts and the current geopolitical metamorphosis, the author analyses
the way Azerbaijan managed to follow an independent and pragmatic policy, comparing to other
former soviet republics, highlighting the interdependent relation between the energy resources and
Azerbaijan’s foreign policy. In this equation, it has great influence Western powers, which through the United States of America and the European Union have contributed to the development of
Azerbaijan, which has now become a key energy player in Europe. But on the other hand, the strategic
importance of Azerbaijan as an energy supplier hasn’t an overall positive impact on the country’s
domestic situation. The fact that Azerbaijan’s energy resources are controlled and managed by the
president and its influential partners, has led to the situation in which power is held by a small number
of people, and the discrepancy between the level of democracy in Azerbaijan’s political institutions
and the theoretical ideal of a democratic government has increased. In this equation is analysed the
government’s interest for energy issues than for democratic ones, while the EU-Azerbaijan relations
are assessed through the lens of conditionality approach. To answer the main research questions, the
author has resorted to the qualitative research method, using semi-structured interviews. The target
group is composed of Azerbaijani experts in energy and political field.
1. “Contract of the Century” and its impact on drawing up Azerbaijan’s foreign policy

After the independence, at the helm of the Republic of Azerbaijan have been three presidents,
in a period of just three years. The following chairmen: Ayaz Mutalibov (1991-1992), Abulfez
Elchibey (1992-1993) and finally Heydar Aliyev (1993-2003) have tried to pull the country out of
the deadlock, facing at that time with significant challenges both internally and externally. Heydar
Aliyev remained in the history of the country not only for the implementation of the so-called
balanced foreign policy concept, but also because he is the leader who used the hydrocarbon resources
of the country for the restoration of Azerbaijan’s foreign policy and economy.
In 1994 was created the Oil strategy, a long-term national development program aimed at
drawing the country’s energy resources to the economic turnover by cooperation with big foreign
companies on the principle of mutual benefit (Strimbovschi, 2015a). In the same year, in September
president Aliyev signed the “Contract of the Century”, an event that marked the beginning of the real
balanced foreign policy. The document was signed not only for economic reasons, but rather political
ones. In this respect, the foremost goal of the government was to contribute to the economic growth
of the country by attracting foreign investors and companies. By developing a competitive economy,
Azerbaijan has more opportunities to become an independent country in decisions concerning its
resource management, asserted Mr. (Strimbovschi, 2015a).
Due to the fragile regional circumstances, Azeri experts argue that while shaping its foreign
policy, Azerbaijan had to take into account the interests and concerns of its neighbours, in order to
prevent undesirable situations, which ultimately may be translated into a genuine balanced and
pragmatic foreign policy (Strimbovschi, 2015b). Apparently, a significant objective of Azeri
506

THE INFLUENCE OF ENERGY RESOURCES IN DEVELOPING “PRAGMATIC” RELATIONS

authorities consisted in developing close relationships with its neighbours, apart of Armenia with
which will continue to be in conflict, until a favourable solution regarding Nagorno-Karabakh will be
found. On account of this, Azerbaijan sought to strengthen its ties especially with Georgia and
Turkey, which have been seen as the main transit countries for Baku’s energy, commercial and
transport projects. Furthermore, Azerbaijan considered Georgia’s stability as part of its own security
interests. Due to these reasons, Baku went a long way toward ensuring the economic stability of
Tbilisi, by selling natural gas at a relatively low price or by investing in the transport or
communication sector of Georgia (Shaffer, 2013, p. 238), and consequently becoming the biggest
foreign direct investor to Georgia, followed by Turkey, Russia, and the Netherlands. At the same
time, the partnership with Ankara is highly important for Baku from two obvious reasons: (1) Turkey
was seen from the beginning as a model for Azerbaijan, which has transformed into a modern,
democratic country with a market economy that shares European values (Strimbovschi, 2015b) but
also (2) is Azerbaijan’s most safe gate to the European markets. Furthermore, Turkey is the only
country in the vicinity of Azerbaijan that can have the power to deal with Russia, especially in the
South Caucasus region. Thus, the partnership with Ankara is literally essential for the security and
prosperity of Azerbaijan, since it proved to be the main supporter of Baku when it came to energy
and economic initiatives. Beyond Baku’s intentions to create a stable, secure and favourable
environment for the country’s development was to attract foreign investments and simultaneously
strengthen its partnerships with actors like the EU and the U.S. in the economic and energy field, and
foster cooperation with NATO in security and defence sector reforms.
In spite of huge endeavour to build harmonious and beneficial relationships for country’s
economic progress, Azerbaijan continue to design a proper environment for itself, by trying to
maintain a considerable degree of independence from any international actor in terms of politics and
security. This cautious approach would allow it to rely on its own capabilities, and in case of need
enable it to cope independently with unexpected challenges in the region. At the same time, in order
to gain respect from its partners and achieve an effective balanced foreign policy, Azerbaijan is trying
to respect some of the key principles of international law, such as the respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs, working hard to become a stable and
predictable actor in bilateral and multilateral relations.

2. The prospects of the East-West energy corridor
During the Soviet period, Azerbaijan’s economy was based in large part on agriculture, oil
production, and oil refining, from which mostly benefited Kremlin, as the core power of USSR. Three years before and three years after getting independence, between 1988-1994, Azerbaijan’s economy
experienced severe contractions because of the outbreak of the Karabakh conflict, but also on grounds
of economic stagnation of the Soviet Union. The partial recovery of economy was due to the oil and
gas reserves, and the significant foreign investments in these sectors.
As mentioned above, the “Contract of the Century” represented the starting point in the
economic improvement and simultaneously balancing the state’s foreign policy. Azeri experts argue
that the successful measures taken by Heydar Aliyev in this field led to the prevention of destroying
the oil and gas industry of the state (Strimbovschi, 2015c). On the contrary, succeeded to transform
it into an attractive one through the notable “Contract of the Century”, the first Production Sharing
Agreement, which regulated the operation of the Azeri, Chirag and Guneshli oil fields, with estimated
reserves of 900 milion tons. As with regard the gas fields, in 1996 was signed an agreement about the
operation of Shah Deniz, and in 1999 British Petroleum ranked it as the second largest field, after
Prudhoe Bay in Alaska, which was discovered in 1970 (Ibrahimov, 2013, p. 121). So far, Azerbaijan
has signed over 30 Production Sharing Agreements for the development of its energy fields, which
turned out to be highly profitable for the country’s economic progress. Even though, Baku received
the first revenues only in 1999, two years after the first operations in oil and gas sector started, the
government was content with the evolution of procedures, and the long-term benefits represented the
main goals of Heydar Alyiev’s strategy. Due to these measures and regulations, Azerbaijan became
the second country from the former Soviet Union by capital investment. At the same time, it managed
to become a reliable, trustful and attractive partner for the foreign companies in the energy sector,
which eventually brought significant changes in the republic, but also crucial opportunities on
external plan. Because foreign investors were looking to develop projects that would bypass the
territory of Russia, and since Azerbaijan was interested to reduce the economic and political
dependence on Moscow, the western proposals in this respect have been positively embraced. Thus,
Azerbaijan became the first former Soviet country that found tactical options to export its own energy
resources to European markets, as an alternative to the Russian route.
With respect to Baku-Novorossiysk oil pipeline, Azeri authorities, backed by western
companies, proposed the construction of a Western Route Export Pipeline, known as Baku-Supsa
pipeline, which runs from the Sangachal Terminal to the Supsa terminal in Georgia. The main
disadvantage of this pipeline is its limited capacity to only 5.5-6 million tons of oil per year. From
this consideration was recommended to build a new pipeline with a capacity of up to 50 million tons
per year from Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli fields under the Contract of Century that would pass through
Georgia and Turkey (Ibrahimov, 2013, p. 128). In this regard, Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan was seen as the
first serious alternative oil pipeline, which carries oil from the Azeri-Chirag-Deepwater Gunashli
508

THE INFLUENCE OF ENERGY RESOURCES IN DEVELOPING “PRAGMATIC” RELATIONS

(ACG) field and condensate from Shah Deniz across Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey. The pipeline
became operational in June 2006, and was built by the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline company (BTC
Co) operated by British Petroleum. The project remains an attractive transportation route for the
Central Asian states as well, which take into account the opportunity to deliver their oil to European
markets. Thus, crude oil from Turkmenistan continues to be transported via the pipeline, and starting
in October 2013, have been resumed the transportation of some volumes of Tengiz crude oil from
Kazakhstan through the BTC pipeline (BP Caspian website, n.a.). Concerning the European version
to Baku-Mozdok gas pipeline is the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline, which is of significant
importance for the European Union, from the energy security point of view. The gas project, also
known as South Caucasus Pipeline was completed in 2006, and in March 2007, the first export gas
was pumped from Shah Deniz field and shipped to Georgia, and then Turkey. South Caucasus
Pipeline Company, the consortium that is led by BP and SOCAR (State Oil Company of Azerbaijan
Republic), owns Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline.
The implementation of these two energy projects has been possible with the support of Western
actors, and especially of foreign companies like BP, AzBTC, Chevron, Statoil TP, ENI, TPAO
(Turkish Petroleum) and SOCAR, which are the main shareholders of the pipelines.
From economic and political point of view, the realization of East-West energy corridor became
a great historical event for Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey. Through these two energy projects,
Azerbaijan gained more independence from Russia in the energy sector, and ultimately in other
significant fields. When Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan and Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum have been completed,
everybody became confident that the future of Azerbaijan is linked to the West through Turkey
(Strimbovschi, 2015d).

3. The evolution of the EU - Azerbaijan relations. Current trends and future perspectives

In South Caucasus region, Azerbaijan has tried to develop cordial relations with every
neighbour but less with Armenia. Due to the sensitive context of the region, created as a consequence
of the tumultuous history among the neighbouring countries, Azerbaijan decided to extend its
cooperative relations beyond the Caucasus zone. As it was mentioned above, after independence, the
United States of America became a strategic partner of Azerbaijan due to the common interest in
developing energy projects, while the European Union’s reputation as the biggest player on the global
trading scene, determined Azerbaijan to get involved in different projects of cultural, social, economic
or energy nature. However, when it comes to issues like democracy, rule of law or respect for human
rights, we will see that Azerbaijani authorities are getting reluctant. The EU-Azerbaijan cooperation started in the early 1990’s via the TACIS program, a technical
assistance program meant to help members of the Commonwealth of Independent States in their
transition to democratic market-oriented economies. The key TACIS multi-country network projects
related to Azerbaijan is TRACECA and INOGATE. TRACECA (Transport Corridor Europe –
Caucasus – Asia) was initiated in 1993 with the purpose of developing the regional transport corridor
from Europe, crossing the Black Sea, Caucasus, the Caspian Sea and reaching the Central Asian
countries. The ultimate goal was to enhance the regional economy (TRACECA Official website). The
development of transport system, in the framework of TRACECA is of great importance for
Azerbaijan, since it created opportunities for strengthening the economic relations between
Azerbaijan and Europe, which, eventually, contributed to the process of integration into the world
economics. One of Azerbaijan’s priorities is to restore and develop the Great Silk Road that would
connect China to the European Union, through Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey. For an
oil-based economy, as is the case of Azerbaijan, transport and logistics represent a sustainable
alternative.
INOGATE (Interstate oil and gas transportation to Europe) laid the foundation for development
of energy cooperation between Azerbaijan and the EU. It was initiated in 1997, as an international
energy cooperation program between the European Union, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia. The program aims to ensure the convergence of energy markets on the basis of the EU
principles; to enhance energy security; support sustainable energy development and attract
investments towards energy projects of common and regional interests (INOGATE 15th Anniversary
Edition, February 2012, p.3). In addition, INOGATE supports the Energy Security Platform within
the framework of the Eastern Partnership. Through it, gave a further impulse to the energy dialogue
between the EU and the countries of Eastern Europe and the Caucasus (INOGATE 15th Anniversary
Edition, February 2012, p.3). The goals of this program coincide with the EU’s target of improving
the security of supply by creating alternative transport corridors (Ibrahimov, 2013, p. 94), aiming to
provide sustainable and secure transportation of hydrocarbons from the Caspian region to its markets.
However, some Azerbaijani representatives consider that EU played a minor role through TACIS and
INOGATE programs, while Russia succeeded to monopolize the transit route to consumer countries
(Ibrahimov, 2013, pp. 94-95). Accordingly, Europe as a consumer ended up in a position of double
dependence on Russia, being dependent on its resources, but also on Russia as a transit country for
the Caspian and Central Asia oil and gas (Umbach, 2011, p. 28). Rovshan Ibrahimov argues that the
implementation of projects under INOGATE initiative, like Northern Gas Pipeline, Nabucco, Odessa
- Bordy oil pipeline or Constanta – Omisalj - Trieste pipeline, has been largely unsuccessful because
the EU has shown insufficient political will to achieve them (Ibrahimov, 2013, pp. 94-95). On the other hand, the EU is offering its financial assistance and to some extent its political support, but in
order to implement projects has to receive, as well, positive signals from the stakeholders. Despite
criticism, since 1996 Azerbaijan has benefited from 33 of INOGATE’s 69 projects, and through this
program the EU continues to provide sustenance for Azerbaijan in various areas of the energy sector
(The INOGATE Programme and the Republic of Azerbaijan, p. 2).
In 2004, the EU suggested to Azerbaijan to join the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)
together with other 15 countries from the southern and eastern vicinity of the EU, in order to enhance
their cooperation on political, economic and social level. In 2006, the EU and Azerbaijan signed a
Memorandum of Understanding in the field of energy, which represented the basis for strengthening
the energy relations between both actors. Later on, in 2009 was proposed the Eastern Partnership
initiative for South Caucasus countries, Moldova, Ukraine and Belarus, due to the Russia’s revanchist
attitude in its near neighbourhood, in particular as a result of the August 2008 war between Russia
and Georgia. Within the new initiative, the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
complemented TACIS program.
Beyond the EU’s goal to develop strategic partnerships with Central Asia and Caspian Region,
especially in the energy field is to democratize these states, according to the European standards, by
carrying out political and structural reforms that would enable governments to work efficiently and
improve the standard of living. Azerbaijan is part of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe since 1995 and member of the Council of Europe since 2001. It follows that the values of
human rights, democracy and rule of law should be fully respected, underpinning the relation between
Azerbaijan and Europe. However Baku often ignores its obligations in the field of political reforms
and human rights undertaken when joining these organizations (Abbasov, 2014, p. 50). In promoting
its values and policies, the European Union applies the principle of Conditionality as one of the main
instruments for advancing democracy. Conditionality is a mechanism whose aim is to disseminate
the governing rules of the European Union, which are set as conditions that external actors must fulfil
in order to get rewards on the one hand, and to prevent sanctions from the EU, on the other hand
(Schimmelfennig, 2010, p. 8). The most relevant rewards offered by the EU consist of benefits
involving the signing of various agreements, such as trade agreements, association agreements and
financial aid. While the EU sanctions consist of discontinuation of such agreements (Schimmelfennig,
2010, p. 9). In the case of Azerbaijan – a partner with strategic assets for the EU - the principle of
conditionality was influenced for the mutual benefits of both actors. Thus, the status of energy
supplier for European countries has offered a high degree of confidence for Azerbaijani leadership,
while the EU, from the need to diversify its energy sources and reduce the dependence on Russia,
tends to remain silent about the democratic deficits in the Caspian nation (Goncharenko, October 2013). Although western actors have been vocal about democracy in Azerbaijan, individual member
states and the EU institutions have in reality co-operated with the regime in Baku without imposing
conditionality (Kobzova and Alieva, 2012, p. 2).
At the same time, the outcomes of the Country Progress Report of 2014 in the framework of
the EU-Azerbaijan European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Action Plan are by no means positive: no
legislation was adopted to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. Only limited progress
was reached in the fight against corruption and there was a lack of coherence in initiatives and
continuing actions. There was no progress regarding actual judicial independence (Implementation
of the European Neighbourhood Policy in Azerbaijan, 2015, p. 2) On the contrary, Azerbaijan’s
presidency of the Council of Europe from April to November 2014 coincided with a new wave of
arrests of representatives of civil society and human rights defenders like Intigam Aliyev, Rasul
Cafarov, Leyla and Arif Yunus (Zasztowt, 2015, p. 1). Fearing the outbreak of a ”colourful
revolution”, Azerbaijani authorities have been determined to take the ”proper” measures, in order to
prevent it, typical for a ”managed democracy”, as Russia has proved to be so many times. But this
conditionality - free approach has brought Europe few benefits and continues to discredit the EU in
the eyes of Azerbaijani society (Kobzova and Alieva, 2012, p. 2).
On the other hand, the European attempts to democratize Azerbaijan are seen as an infringement
of sovereignty. For these reasons, European Union enjoys of a limited influence on these states
compared to Russia, China, India or Iran with whom Azerbaijan and the countries from Central Asia
share similar values. While the EU is focused on the need for comprehensive reforms across a range
of sectors, especially those related to human rights and democracy, Azerbaijan is looking for a
strategic relationship based on mutual interests and objectives, while implementing a part of the
economic reforms (Mammadov, 2015, p. 10). As Maja Kocijancic, Spokesperson of the European
Commission for neighbourhood policy and enlargement negotiations, has described this approach:
Azerbaijan has expressed its interest in a strategic relationship with the EU without the high degree
of political association and economic integration sought by some of the other Eastern Partners
(Dadashova, 2015). Thus, in contrast to neighbouring Georgia, where integration with the EU is a
political goal, Baku’s leaders seek to create its own economic and political model with the European
Union.

3.1. From Association Agreement to Strategic Modernization Partnership

In 2010, the EU had discussions with all three countries of the South Caucasus about the
perspectives of signing association agreements, which include a free trade area, but a precondition for signing such an agreement is the country’s prior accession to the World Trade Organization
(Zasztowt, 2015, p. 2). Since Azerbaijan is reluctant in implementing this process because of the
potential implications on the monopolized economy, results that such an agreement is not that
welcomed by Baku. But instead of the Association Agreement, Baku prefers a Strategic
Modernization Partnership (SMP), similar to that signed by Russia with the EU in 2010, which is not
legally binding but offers opportunities to develop cooperative partnerships in those areas that are of
concern to Azerbaijan. The draft document dated 4 April 2013 stipulates softer political reforms than
those set out in Azerbaijan – EU Action Plan of 2006. Notwithstanding, the new document prioritizes
the security cooperation, trade and business environment, energy, environment and transport, and
people-to-people contacts (Rettman, 2013). Azerbaijan planned to sign the SMP in November 2013,
at the Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius. Nevertheless the former Commissioner for Enlargement
and European Neighbourhood Policy, Štefan Füle, proposed to continue the negotiations on the
Association Agreement and the draft of the Strategic Modernisation Partnership in parallel, pointing
out the character of complementarity of the two documents (Fineko Informational & Analytic
Agency, 2013). In 2013, during a meeting between the former Commissioner, Štefan Füle, and
Minister for Economic Development of Azerbaijan, Shahin Mustafayev, where have been discussed
ways to widen the EU – Azerbaijan cooperation, Füle expressed its hopes in a future relationship
built around shared values, good governance, human rights and democracy, stressing that the
ultimate beneficiaries should be citizens (EU-Azerbaijan: Commitment to widen cooperation and
support modernization, Brussels, 29 August 2013). Thus, from the European perspective,
modernization is closely linked to a democratic society.
At the same time, the EU is encouraging Azerbaijan to intensify its work towards the WTO
accession, ultimately aiming to establish a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (EU Reporter
Correspondent, 2013). From Baku’s perspective, a free trade agreement with the EU would bring
little economic gain, since Azerbaijan does not have competitive industrial or agricultural products
for export to EU markets (Socor, 2013). On the contrary, it considers that will expose itself to the risk
of importing from the EU, a phenomenon that would hinder the development of Azerbaijani industry
(Socor, 2013). However, we can see that the main obstacle against the diversification of the economy
is the corruption and the domination of the political and economic system by Aliyev family (European
Forum for Democracy and Solidarity).
Through modernization, Azerbaijan understands the development of various sectors of its
economy, other than oil and gas (Socor, 2013), since the national oil production is in decline while
the oil prices have experienced a continuous drop, beginning with June 2014. Baku’s priority is to get
new technologies, to develop industry, agriculture and to continue the development of energy sector. In sum, Azerbaijan is trying to translate the income from oil exports to sustainable development and
diversification of the economy (Zasztowt, 2015, p. 3). But in this equation, the EU plays a crucial
role, while the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement would be the most important
instrument for achieving these goals.

3.2. The thorn in the relationship between the European Union and Azerbaijan

According to Azerbaijan, the ideal relationship with the European Union should be based on
‘mutual respect and equality of rights of the parties’ (Socor, 2013), yet some sensitive issues are
making it difficult.
For years Baku has been involved in a diplomatic struggle for the West to recognize NagornoKarabakh illegal occupation by Armenia. However, the international community has started to pay
greater importance once it has proved that Azerbaijan could become a significant energy partner. But
a favourable solution has not been found so far. The fruitless mediation efforts of the OSCE Minsk
Group and the EU’s failure to recognize Azerbaijan’s territorial integrity in the same way it did with
other EaP countries that have territorial disputes (Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine) (Mammadov, May
2015 p. 33) has increased over time the discontent of Azerbaijani authorities. Due to the ambiguous
approach of the EU, which is trying to maintain a neutral position between Azerbaijan and Armenia,
Baku is accusing the EU of playing by double standards. But the EU is not very inclined to take part
in a dispute settlement because it understands that if demonstrates a preference for one side over
another that would have negative consequences for its reputation (Abbasov, 2015, p. 61). This issue
became the most significant thorn in the relationship of the two actors, because of which Azerbaijan
decided to abandon the Association Agreement. In the context of negotiating the Strategic
Modernisation Partnership, Azerbaijan’s EU ambassador, Fuad Iskandarov, pointed out that one of
Azerbaijan’s priorities for the EU is to show respect for the country’s territorial integrity (Rettman,
2013). The elite, being disappointed in the U.S. and the EU is counting on Russia’s favour. But the
2014 illegal annexation of Crimea and the war in the eastern Ukraine convinced officials in Baku that
Moscow is setting the rules in the post-Soviet area and may intervene even without an international
mandate, explaining its actions as a peacekeeping operation (Ismayilov, Zasztowt, ]2015, p. 4).
Meanwhile, Azerbaijan was looking to upgrade its military capabilities by buying weapons from
Turkey, Israel and Russia. The economic development of the country, highly dependent on the export
of energy resources, allowed it to increase the defence budget from $175 million in 2004 to $3.7
billion in 2015, which is twice as large as Armenia’s overall state budget (Altstadt and Menon, 2016).
By contrast, Armenia’s military budget amounted to $448 million. Thus, Azerbaijani authorities are getting prepared to take the risk, when the diplomacy will fail, thereupon the military option to recover
the occupied territory, remains on the table.
Although, the EU is accused by lack of involvement in solving this conflict, the EU is present
in the region since 2003 through the EU Special Representative for the Southern Caucasus, which is
closely working with the Co-Chairs of the OSCE (EUEA, n.a.). In this respect, the EU had a
peripheral role, however has endeavoured to promote economic integration, consolidate democratic
structures, and improve respect for human rights in Azerbaijan. Nevertheless, Azerbaijan has treated
superficially most of the EU recommendations related to the rule of law and fundamental values of
democracy. Despite this, European Union continues to call Azerbaijan a strategic partner due to its
vast hydrocarbon resources and crucial geographical position between Central Asia and Europe. But
the pragmatic nature of the EU-Azerbaijan relations will contribute to the deterioration of democracy
in the concerned country if the EU will not adopt a firmer stance regarding the protection of its values
and principles. Baku is trying to negotiate, by playing its card as an energy security supplier for the
EU and develop relations based on ‘mutual respect and equality of rights of the parties’. Although,
Azerbaijan has shown its interest in enhancing cooperation with Euro-Atlantic institutions, so far it
did not declare any will to join the EU or NATO (Ismayilov and Zasztowt, 2015, p. 2). The reluctance
of Azerbaijani leaders can be explained both from political and security considerations. The Georgian
and Ukrainian precedent determined Baku to act with caution in foreign policy, as not to disturb the
‘Eastern bear’. On the other hand, the required reforms for a complete European integration could
represent a real danger for the political power and elite’s monopoly on oil resources, while nonintegration enables state leaders to balance the interest of regional and extra-regional players, using
full control over its energy resources both for commercial and political purposes (Alieva, 2015).
Unless the EU will condition future partnerships with Azerbaijan by the need to carry out certain
reforms or show respect for key democratic values, the EU’s credibility will suffer, while the
democratic deficit in Azerbaijan will increase.
However, the current situation of instability, caused by the decline of oil prices may have a
positive impact on the EU-Azerbaijan economic cooperation (Alieva, 2015). In order to avoid the
collapse of the country’s economy, Azerbaijan could be more determined to perform the required
economic reforms to accede to WTO and later to enhance the economic integration with the EU, by
signing the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement.

3.3. Energy - a sphere of common interest

Within the European initiatives, the only progress registered by the EU with Azerbaijan is in
the energy sphere. Azerbaijan is looking to connect its pipelines to Europe, which is one of the most
attractive consumers, while the EU is seeking to diversify its suppliers, aiming to develop energy
projects with predictable actors from the Caspian Sea, Central Asia and North Africa.
In 2006 after the first Ukrainian gas crisis, energy security became a top matter on the EU
agenda. The major challenge for Europe is that none of the countries of South and Eastern Europe
hold significant hydrocarbon resources and inevitable are obliged to import. Likewise, the fact that
Gazprom is the leading provider for these countries, and because are geographically placed at the
crossroads between Eurasia and Middle East, the transfer of fuel resources on the European market
is perceived as critical and volatile (Cehulic et al., 2013, p. 118). The security of the EU’s energy
supplies has become particularly complicated due to the 2004 enlargement wave, when 10 countries
from the Central and Eastern Europe joined the EU. Accordingly, the EU’s strategic objective to
ensure its energy security became more difficult to achieve. Thus, the diversification of suppliers
became a prerequisite in order to ensure the energy security of the whole EU. On that account,
between 2003 and 2013 new partner countries emerged. Even though their export volumes are
relatively small, they became an alternative for the EU. The other options for crude oil imports would
be from Nigeria, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Iraq, and for natural gas imports - Qatar, Libya,
Azerbaijan and maybe Turkmenistan or Iran. In this context, would be useful to consider the 2004
International Energy Agency report, where has been forecasted that until 2030 the diversification of
European suppliers will be as the following: Russia (79 bcm of natural gas), Central Asia and Caspian
(51 bcm of natural gas), Middle East (40 bcm of natural gas and 117 bcm of LNG), Africa (70 bcm
of natural gas, 61 bcm of LNG) and Latin America (18 bcm of LNG). Total projected consumption
in Europe in 2030 is put at 667 bcm/y. Of this, a projected 27 bcm/y will be supplied in the form of
LNG (4 percent of the total consumption); 200 bcm/y produced domestically, and a large proportion,
over 400 bcm/y will be imported from Russia, the Caspian, and from North Africa through pipeline
gas (Bilgin, 2013, p. 314).
3.3.1. Azerbaijan – a potential supplier of energy security for the EU

Considering the above-mentioned data, Caspian Sea and North Africa are among the top regions
outside the Europe, which will contribute to the diversification of the EU’s hydrocarbon sources. The
energy reserves of Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Azerbaijan that are located in the Caspian Basin represent a solution for the EU’s highly dependence on one provider. Kazakhstan and
Azerbaijan leads in the production of oil and together hold 92 percent of total oil reserves in the
region, while Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan are the largest producers of natural gas in Central Asia,
with 27 percent and 40 percent respectively (Umbach, 2011, p. 27).
Following the Russo-Ukrainian gas dispute of January 2009, Azerbaijan has expressed its
interest to export gas to Europe through different projects, either through Nabucco, ITGI
(Interconnector Turkey-Greece-Italy), TAP (Trans-Adriatic Pipeline) or even to ship liquefied natural
gas on the Black Sea to Romania. Despite a long potential list of projects, in January 2011, the
president of Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliev and the president of European Commission, Jose Manuel
Barroso signed a formal declaration in Baku, where Azerbaijan assumed the responsibility to provide
gas to EU through Southern Gas Corridor (Roberts, 2011, p. 185). One year later, in October 2012,
Azerbaijan took the responsibility to build Trans-Anatolian Pipeline (TANAP) from the Turkish –
Georgian border through the whole territory of Turkey up to its western border, through which
Azerbaijani gas will be delivered to the markets of Greece, Albania, Italy and Bulgaria. With a similar
purpose, was planned the Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) through which gas will be transported from
Turkey to European markets (Ibrahimov, 2013, p. 130).
At the moment, Azerbaijan is considered the only Caspian riparian state that can safely supply
gas to European markets through Southern Gas Corridor, and eventually improve the European
energy security, without creating additional geopolitical tension. Azerbaijan’s current gas reserves
stand at almost three trillion cubic meters (tcm) following a large discovery in Shah Deniz field a
decade ago (some 1.3 tcm) and recent discoveries in the Absheron and Umid fields, each containing
400 bcm (Bilgin, 2013, p.320). Starting with 2018-2020 Azerbaijan will be able to channel 15-20
bcm of gas to European markets, but plans to increase its production to 30-50 bcm/y from 2025
onward following successful field developments in Umid, Absheron, and Shafag-Asiman offshore
fields, which would represent an effective solution to guarantee the EU energy security. At the same
time, the EU is negotiating with Turkmenistan in order to join SGC through the Trans-Caspian
Pipeline, which could possibly supply some additional 30 billon cubic meters to the Azerbaijani
volume delivered to Europe (Ismayilov and Zasztowt, 2015, p. 2).
The illegal annexation of Crimea and Russia’s interference in Eastern Ukraine, have affected
the relationship between Moscow and Brussels, representing the official moment when Russia
stepped into a geopolitical competition with the European Union. The new context, determined the
European Commission to provide more support for the Southern Gas Corridor since TANAP and
TAP may cover 20 percent of European gas needs in the long term (Kusznir, 2015, p.6) and would
represent the fourth big axis for diversification of gas supplies in Europe after Northern Corridor from Norway, the Eastern corridor from Russia and the Mediterranean Corridor from Africa. In these
circumstances, Baku was seen as an indispensable partner in the EU’s energy security plans and
eventually took advantage of this, managing to temper those voices in the EU that were more critical
of the regime and instead focused on the sectors that are most beneficial for the current elite (Kobzova,
Alieva, 2012, p. 3) If the European Union will continue to accept this situation and remain silent on
democratic deficit in Azerbaijan, should take into consideration that its goals of Europeanizing /
democratizing eastern vicinity will fail and consequently its credibility as a normative and soft power
will be considerably affected.

Final remarks

In the early years of independence, the strategy proposed by the president Heydar Aliyev
represented the decisive formula for Azerbaijan’s political sovereignty and economic prosperity. But,
as the country has progressed in economic terms due to the oil and gas reserves, it has regressed in
terms of rule of law, democracy and human rights. Baku is not willing to advance its relations with
Brussels in the political sector, the reason for which the Association Agreement with the EU will not
be signed in the near future, instead it seems that the Strategic Modernization Partnership represents
a better option for Azerbaijani leadership since it does not put political obligations. At the same time,
it seems that the principle of conditionality - a mechanism for promoting EU’s values and principles
– has failed in Azerbaijan, having priority the EU’s strategic interest in energy security. Beyond the
intentions of developing these projects of strategic nature, the EU has to continue the negotiation on
the Association Agreement with Azerbaijan and ensure the effective implementation of the
commitments undertaken in their bilateral agreements, pressing for issues of democracy and human
rights to occupy the same crucial place as the energy does in the current European agenda in the
dialogue with Baku.