between food and health is influenced by the natural environment and the climate
conditions, by the degree of economic development, by the occupations of the population.
Lew (2013) identifies the moments in which the tourist/consumer meets with the food: in
periods of leisure, exploration, and of experimenting new tastes.
At the European Union level, the market for traditional products registers sales of 14
million euro annually (Popa, 2011). On the Romanian level sale of these products usually
takes place in fairs and markets, but very few of them are available on the shelves of large
stores. But these products amount to annual sales levels of over 100 million euro, according
to the statistics of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD).
In the European Union, according to data given by the chamber of Deputies there are 844
recognised traditional products, of which: 459 products with protected designation of origin
(PDO); 362 products with protected geographical indication (PGI); 20 traditional speciality
guaranteed (TSG).
Means of certification, and general imposed conditions for the traditional products at the
European Union level are provided in the CE Regulation number 509/20.03.2006 of the
Council regarding the traditional guaranteed specialities made from agricultural and food
products and in the CE Regulation number 1216/18.10.2007 of the Commission regarding
the establishment of norms of application of the CE Regulation number 509/2006 of the
Council. Member states have adopted their own legislation to the European one, and also to
the requirements of the consumers of their own countries.
Since January 2013 the European Union comes to meet the producers and consumers with
improved rules through which a product can be acknowledged as having the Traditional
Specialty Guaranteed (TSG), Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) or Protected
Designation of Origin (PDO) attribute. To these attributes the indicative “mountain
product” was added, for the first time in this regulation and after 2014 the indicative
“produced in my farm” will be recognised (Steriu, V. et all, 2012).
In order to regulate the traditional products market, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development (MARD) has elaborated together with the National Authority for the
Protection of Consumers (NAPC) and the Ministry of health, the project of an order which
will attest the traditional products, which may be put into practice by the end of the year
2013. This order project has entered public debate at the date of 30 July 2013 according to
the internet page of the MARD. According to this order the traditional products will be
marked with a national logo which will be in the exclusive property of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development (Figure 1).

Figure no. 1. Logo of a traditional attested product
Source: Costăchel - revista virtuală de gastronomie reală, 2013.
conditions and criteria for the certification of traditional products”, the traditional product is
defined as “the product which must be obtained from traditional ingredients, present a
traditional composition or a way of production and /or traditional processing which uses a
technological production and /or processing traditional procedure and which is clearly
distinguished from other similar products belonging to the same category ". Even more, in
order to be registered as such, a product must be “traditional as itself or represent
traditionality”.
In Romania there have been registered over 4000 traditional products, most of them from
the dairy and meat sector, followed by products from the milling industry and by products
from the beverage sector according to the information provided by the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD).
The European market for food products with geographic origin is very big, in the year 2010
it reached 54 billion euro. From the total of the 54 billion agri-food products had 29%,
wines 56%, the rest being represented by spirits and aromatic wines. Most of the sales are
registered in the countries which produce them (60% of the total sales). 20% came from the
outside of the European Union and 20% from countries belonging to the European Union
(Chever et al., 2012).
1. Romanian traditional products between tale and reality
At the level of Romania agri-foodstufs represent only 2.5% of the total sales, while the EU
-27 presents a rate of 6%. Guerrero et al. (2010) underlines the fact that producing and
selling traditional products may have an important economic impact in many regions and
can contribute to the development of rural areas and to avoiding their depopulation.
The demand for the traditional products, is greater and greater, this demand earned the
attention of many companies who have begun making market studies in order to better
understand the requirements of the consumers for these products. According to the results
of such a study, the main criteria that a food product must fulfil in order to be considered
traditionally Romanian are: the absence of preservatives and E-s (29%), traditional recipe
(27%), for it to be natural, obtained with natural ingredients (23%), to have the area in
which it was initially produced mentioned (17%) (Popa, 2011). This study was made by the
Exact Cercetare și Consultanță company, in the February/March of 2011 period, on a
sample of 655 people selected from the company’s panel.
Romania has over 4000 traditional products, but just one of them reaches the tables of
Swiss, British or Greeks: the Topoloveni jam. For international recognition you need
investments in production technology, and – unfortunately, the Romanian farmers either are
not interested, or do not have the necessary money.
Is there a Romanian specific regional cuisine in the true sense of the word?
In his paper entitled‚ Ghidul Gastronomic al României – Bucătăria tradiţională, Iordan
(2010) claims that the cuisine supposes a historical development in terms of content, but
also in terms of dynamic. Along its evolution, the Romanian cuisine follows the stages of
development of the regional human community, being influenced by economic, social,
climacteric, relief factors; by the contact with other ethnicities and cultures, by the degree
of civilisation, but also by the tastes and preferences of the Romanians. All these taken into
consideration, it manages to keep its tradition, taste and ingredients being transmitted from
generation to generation, without ignoring the new tendencies in the domain.
Taking into account the increased interest shown for the production and commercialisation
of traditional products on an European and national level, a major objective of the present
work was identifying and structuring the traditional Romanian products by the regions of
provenience. In order to reach this objective we used a secondary source research, implying
a systematic data analysis on the National Register of Traditional Products, from the period
of 2005 – 2012, available on the site of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Radu Anton Roman claimed in his book „Bucate, vinuri şi obiceiuri româneşti“: „What are
the moussaka, the ciorba (borsch), the meatloaf, ciolanul pe fasole (bone on beans),
pancakes and other traditional food, other than deposits, sediments, either of the ottoman
occupation, or of the French, German, fanaro – Greek influences“. Starting from these
words of a famous writer, journalist and TV producer we have realised an analysis of the
main regional cuisines.
The Moldavian cuisine is very diversified from the type of dishes point of view. There are
dishes specific to this region for starters, soups, main courses with vegetables, main courses
with meat, desserts, preserved foods, pickles and other.
The ways to prepare Moldavian food are many, from baking or pickling to using salt,
smoking, frying or smothering. Food prepared in this way are usually very tasty, but not
necessary dietary.
The main products, registered in the Traditional products attestation register in the area of
Moldova are presented in Table 1.
Table no. 1. Traditional products - Moldova
Bread and bakery
products
• Branzoaice
(Cheesecake) ''Poalen brâu'' – Boteşti,
county of Neamţ
• Cozonac de casă
(homemade sponge
cake) – Botești,
county of Neamţ
• Pâinea bunicii
(Grandma’s bread) Boteşti, county of
Neamţ

Meat products

Dairy products
• Cheese – Grumăzeşti, county of
Neamţ
• Cow cheese - Şipote county of
Iaşi
• Cheddar – smoked appetizer –
Flamânz, county of Botoşani
• Smoked cheddar – Vorona, jud.
Botoşani, Grumăzeşti, Urecheni
county of Neamţ
• Skimmed milk - Şipote, county
of Iaşi
• Urda (cheese) – Miroslăveşti,
county of Iaşi

• Sausages - Botoşani
• Mutton sausages Botoşani
• Chişcă (pudding with
meat) - Botoşani
• Smoked cutlet Botoşani
• Peasant pastrami Botoşani
• Salami - Botoşani
• Toba (pudding with
meat) - Botoşani

Source: the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 2006
A large range of beverages are served in the Romanian cuisine they can be differentiated by
the ingredients they are made of, by the technologies, age and season. Such a beverage is
braga – low alcoholic drink. A high alcoholic drink is the brandy or sugar beet basamac.
a brand specific to this area.
Dobrogea cuisine is highly influenced by the area climate, landform and fauna.
In a hilly, mountainous, plain area but also with access to rivers and sea, fish dishes, wild
game or mutton dishes are very usual, but also chicken meat, beef or pork, vegetables,
fruits, dairy products and eggs. Dobrogea food displays the abundance of ingredients this
area has.
Dobrogea dishes are light, nourishing and tasty while simple to prepare. They are based
especially on mutton, game and fish. One specific dish is Dobrogean pie made with sheep
cheese and served with yoghurt.
The main products, registered in the Traditional products attestation register in the area of
Dobrogea are presented in Table 2.
Table no. 2. Traditional Products - Dobrogea
Dairy products
• Salted cheese - Cătalina, Silistraru,Vlădeni, county of Tulcea
• Sheep salted cheese – Băneasa, county of Constanţa
• Cow salted cheese - Adamclisi, Băneasa, Negru Vodă, county of Constanţa
Source: the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 2008/2009
Muntenia traditional cuisine is characterised by tasty food. Borsch is made with chicken
and beef but also with vegetables, in order to make them sour borsch is used, lovage is used
a lot and this gives a specific taste. Borsch, especially vegetable ones, are improved with
rice, but also with “rags” made out of egg and flour.
Dishes are made out of meat and vegetables or only fresh or preserved vegetables, like:
stew, moussaka, chicken stew, fish cooked in an oven or baked with different garnishes,
forcemeat rolls in cabbage leaves with polenta, lamb stew(the National office of traditional
and ecological Romanian products, 2010).
Cuisine in Muntenia has suffered along the times Greek, oriental, French and Italian
influences.
The main products, registered in the Traditional products attestation register in the area of
Muntenia are presented in Table 3.
Banat cuisine is one of the most savoury of the whole country. It is a mix of Austro –
Hungarian, Greek, Italian and French cuisine. The people of Banat are taught to eat well at
every meal of the day. There is no lunch without ciorba (Borsch). Rags soup is a Banat
favourite. Among the most well-known food you can find: zacusca, veal borsch, beet
borsch, old forcemeat rolls in cabbage leaves, stuffed onion and puddings.
Food prepared in Banat are made with pork, especially with fried vegetables and smothered
in lard or oil, with flour sauces, spices like pepper, thyme, paprika and caraway.

Table no. 3. Traditional products - Muntenia
Bread and
bakery products
• Buzau pretzels Buzău
• Homemade
traditional
sponge cake Buzău
• Traditional
braids -Buzău
• Pita - Buzău
• Black bread Brăila
• Country bread Verneşti county
of Buzău

Dairy products

Meat products

• White cheese - Săpunari Călăraşi
• Fresh cow cheese -Bradu,
Coseşti, Arges
• Smoked cheese - Campulung,
Dambovicioara, Rucăr,
Stoienesti, Valea Mare -Parvat
county of Arges, Buzau
• Milk covaşit- Campulung,Valea
Mare-Pravat county of Arges
• Urda (cheese)-Corbi, Curtea de
Arges county of Arges
• Sheep urda (cheese) – Coseşti Arges

• Babic - Pleşcoi- Buzău
• Smoked sausages - Pleşcoi
• Fresh sausages- Domneşti
county of Argeş
• Country sausages -Bascov
county of Argeş
• Dry sausages-Pleşcoi-Buzău
• Sheep pastrami -Bâscov,
Cetăţeni, Dâmboviciiara,
Domnești county of Argeş
• Smoked fat - Bâscov-Argeş
• Traditional homemade tobă
(pudding with meat) Bâscov-Argeş

Source: Sterian, 2013, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, 2011.
Banat cuisine is characterised by tasty, fat and nourishing food.
The main products, registered in the Traditional products attestation register in the area of
Banat are presented in Table 4.
Table no. 4. Traditional products - Banat
Meat products

Dairy products

• Smoked house made Caltaboş (sausage) –
Bocşa county of Caraş -Severin
• Homemade sausages –Bocşa county of Caraş
- Severin
• Smoked bacon - Bocşa county of CaraşSeverin
• Jumări (greaves)-Bocşa county of CaraşSeverin
• Smoked Sângeretele (pork meat sausage) Bocşa county of Caraş-Severin
• Smoked fat - Bocşa county of Caraş-Severin
• Housemade smoked bacon - Bocşa county of
Caraş -Severin
• Homemade tobă (pudding with meat) - Bocşa
county of Caraş - Severin

• Salted cheese Vermes, county
of Caraş Severin
• Cream -Vermes
county of Caraş Severin
• Butter-Vermes
county of Caraş Severin

Bread and
bakery
products
• Banat bread
-Bocşa
county of
CaraşSeverin

Source: the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, 2005/2006

most important culinary critics of the last half of the century from Great Britain, Egon
Ronay, Hungarian by origin, used to write in his editorials in the Daily Telegraph that
cuisine has given the world three complex culinary concepts: French cuisine; Chineese
cuisine; Transilvanian cuisine.
The Transilvanian heritage contains: flour and paprika sauces; using herbal spices (like dill,
parsley, tarragon, marjoram, basil); soups in which fruits and smoked meat mix.
In the centre of Transilvania, local gastronomy is characterised by Ardeal and Hungarian
food.
The main products, registered in the Traditional products attestation register in the area of
Transilvania are presented in Table 5.
Table no. 5. Traditional products - Transilvania
Bread and bakery products
• Grandmas’ sponge cake - Baia
Mare
• Maramures braids -Baia Mare
• Homemade Oloi - Miresul
Mare
• Homemade bread - Baia Mare,
Ocna Șugatag, Desesti
• Country corn bread - Targu
Lăpuş
• Pasca- Baia Mare
• Homemade Pita - Miresul
Mare
• Rastaute - Baia Mare

Dairy products
• Brânză de burduf (bellows
cheese) - Cerneşti, Șighetul
Marmaţiei
• Smoked Brânză de burduf
(bellows cheese) - Târgul
Lăpus
• Salted cheese - Cerneşti,
Larga, Ocna Șugatag,
Sighetul Marmaţiei, Tisa,
Marginimea Sibiului, Sibiu
• Cheddar - Barsana, Cerneşti,
Larga, Sighetul Marmaţiei,
Târgul Lăpuş, Tisa

Meat products
• Smoked fat
Cugir area
• Smoked pork
muscle Vlădeni
area,
• Smoked
sausages made
from mutton
and veal Vlădeni area

Source: the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, 2012
Oltenian Cusine represents a distinctive aspect in the life of the people, forming a real cult
linked to food and means of preparation. The most distinctive symbol of Oltenia was and
will be the leek. People in oltenia eat lots of borsch, often they consume leek, chicken or
vegetable borsch, which they prefer a little sour (RomanianMonastarys.org, 2013).
The main products, registered in the Traditional products attestation register in the area of
Oltenia are presented in Table 6.
The best represented region, if we look at the number of registered products is Transilvania.
In this region people have been more receptive to the advantages that products registration
as traditional products has to offer


•

•

•
•

•

Bread and bakery
products
Colaci (large pretzels)
– Drobeta Turnu
Severin county of
Mehedinţi
Oltenesti colaci and
prescuri - Băileşti
county of Olt
Bread on the hearth –
Băileşti - Olt
Homemade bread –
Drobeta Turnu Severin
county of Mehedinţi
Country Turtite (small
bread) on the hearth Băileşti Olt

Dairy products

Meat products

• Fermented cheese -Teleşti
county of Gorj
• Cheddar - Drobeta Turnu
Severin county of Mehedinţi
• Olt cheddar with leek Breasta county of Dolj
• Cow milk salted cheese –
Drobeta Turnu Severin
• Olt salted cheese with dill and
pepper - Breasta county of
Dolj
• Olt salted cheese with leek Breasca county of Dolj

• Caltaboşi (sausages) Craiova county of Dolj
• Olt sausages - Craiova
• Rose sausages Craiova
• Drob -Craiova
• Specialties: Bucăţi la
garniţa (meat kept with
lard)- Craiova
• Tobă (pudding with
meat)- Craiova

Source: the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, 2006
The region which was least receptive to the traditional product registration was Dobrogea
(Table 7).
Table no. 7. Number of traditional products divided by most important categories and
geographic areas
Product class
Regions
Moldova
Dobrogea
Muntenia
Banat
Transilvania

Dairy
95
8
482
14
344

Meat
products
188
89
32
232

Bakery
18
3
36
36
328

Vegetables –
Alcoholic
fruits, preserves beverages
14
2
62
1
2
10
160

Source: Analysis on the National office of traditional and ecological Romanian products,
2010.
Romanian traditional products have a large potential to sell on the external markets, where
people appreciate the tradition that is used to develop these foods. They represent a viable
counter offer to the similar products from other countries.
2. Research methodology
The purpose of the direct marketing research has followed the investigation of the main
dimensions / characteristics of the consumer behaviour towards the traditional products
existing on the Romanian market, in order to build a complete picture of the local
offer for Romanian traditional products. The utility of the research theme is confirmed by
the reduced number of existing studies in Romania with regards to the problems raised by
traditional products, by the lack of a common opinion regarding the content of the term,
among consumers and also among providers and last but not least by the tendency of
development of the European consumers demand for traditional products from the region.
In this context, the objectives of the present research refer mainly to:
• understanding the measure in which Romanian consumers are familiarised with the
notion of traditional product and the interest for the present offer;
• determining the consumers availability to buy and consume Romanian traditional
products;
• identifying the degree of entry in consumption of the most important categories of
traditional products.
The method applied has been quantitative, having the characteristics of a pilot inquiry. The
collective on which the research was made contained people over 18 years old, both male
and female, coming from various regions of the country (Table 8).
Table no. 8. Demographic details
Characteristics

Number
Female
315
Sex
Male
389
18-24
310
25-34
176
35-44
108
Age
45-44
79
>55
31
Professional school
25
High school
199
Studies
University studies
480
Banat
19
Oltenia
70
Muntenia
405
Area of
Dobrogea
47
provenience
Moldova
125
Ardeal
38
Source: realised by authors based on research

%
44.7
55.3
44.60
25
15.3
11.2
4.4
3.6
28.3
68.2
2.7
9.9
57.5
6.7
17.8
5.4

The observation unit, and the inquiry unit are represented by the individual. The study was
realised by applying the self-administered inquiry method, using the technique of the on
line interview, in order to make possible the investigation of respondents from all the
regions of the country, with reduced costs.
The instrument used for gathering the information was a structured questionnaire, based on
closed questions, in order for the data to be easy to fill in and easy to centralize. In essence
we tried to identify the type of traditional products with success potential among Romanian

consumers. The questionnaire was applied in the month of May 2013, being distributed
through e-mail and the social network Facebook.
The final sample contained 704 respondents, and its structure is shown in graphical form in
Table 8. Following the processing, the data were analysed, this supposed using statistical
and mathematical techniques in order to characterise the variation and the spread of the
variables, by presenting the distribution according to frequency.

3. Results and debates
One of the research objectives was the understanding of the degree in which Romanian
consumers are familiar with the notion of traditional product and the concern expressed in
relation to the related offer. According to research results, about 40% of the respondents
inform themselves about traditional products out of curiosity, while ~ 32% of the
respondents are interested in these products not out of mere curiosity, but also because they
desire to consume them (Figure 2).

I know nothing of this
product

5,80%
31,80%

39,70%
22,70%

I have read certain
articles in newspapers,
magazines

I heard something but I am
not interested by the
subject
I am interested by the
domain

Figure no. 2. Degree of concern for traditional products
Source: realised by authors based on research
From a management point of view, this result indicates the possibility of promoting
traditional products through newspapers, magazines, the Internet. In terms of product
policy, organisations are recommended to promote their traditional products through these
media channels, obtaining thus, new competitive advantages.
A second targeted objective was to analyze how determined are consumers to buy,
respectively consume Romanian traditional products. In this respect, information derived
from the research show that 75% of the respondents would buy and consume traditional
products, 19.5% are not decided, while the rest of 5.8% declare that they do not wish to buy
or consume these products (Figure 3).


19,50%
5,80%
Yes

No

Undecided

Figure no. 3. Attractiveness of traditional products
Source: realised by authors based on research
From a management point of view, this result indicates a potential of growth of the market
in future years, due to increasing demand for these products. In terms of product policy,
organisations that choose to diversify their assortment of traditional products have the
possibility to harness this opportunity, obtaining new competitive advantages.
A third objective regarded identifying the degree of penetration in consumption, of the most
important types of traditional products. According to results, 24% of the respondents would
buy bread and bakery products, 23.5% would buy meat products, 21.8% would buy dairy
products and 17.1% would buy fruits and vegetables products (Table 9).
Table no. 9. Traditional products most likely to be purchased
Bread and bakery products
24%
Meat products
23.5%
Dairy products
21.8%
Vegetable and fruits products
17.1%
Fish products
8.4%
Do not consume
4.1%
Other products
1.2%
Source: realised by authors based on research
This result indicates the existence of a growth potential for businesses with objectives in
bakery products production, meat and dairy products, fruits and vegetables products, all
according to traditional recipes. The providers who decide to diversify their product
assortment will have the opportunity to obtain new competitive advantages (this already is
happening in big supermarkets where there have been arranged specific stands only for
traditional products).

Conclusions
Consumers desire to purchase traditional products, Trichopoulou, et all (2006) accentuates
that they are sometimes deceived by some merchants that use on the labels the “traditional
product” designation, thus inducing loss of confidence in traditional products.
Luis Guerrero et all (2009) and Zuzanna Pieniak et all (2009) underline that improvements
are necessary in what concerns the security and health of traditional products, in order to
increase the market share for these products.
Romania has just one product with UE recognition that is “Magiunul de Topoloveni”. Very
little compared to the 4000 products registered at national level, which makes the concept
of “traditional product” lose its notoriety.
This sector generates high revenues, which most of the time end up in the pockets of
“whom it should not”, imposing a need for urgent change in current legislation regarding
this field. Traditional products producers are faced with the option of closing down their
small businesses, when confronted with unfair competition.
On European Union level, this field regulation is implemented with a professional
approach, thus on EU level, being registered around 1000 traditional products. (European
Commission, 2013). The system imposed in EU protects and promotes commercial brands
of agricultural products and traditional European foods. The work of thousands of farmers
and food producers is thus harnessed, concurring to the development and conservation of
EU rural patrimony. Also, the system guarantees to consumers that they can trust the food
products which carry this label.
The region of Romania which has profited from the traditional products is Transilvania,
fact underlined by the very large number of registered products, but also through the many
profile associations like Asociaţia Producătorilor de Produse Tradiţionale şi Ecologice din
Maramureş (The Association of Traditional and Ecological Products Producers of
Maramureş ), Asociaţia Producătorilor de Produse Tradiţionale şi Ecologice (The
Association of Traditional and Ecological Products) "Alba Transilvania", Asociaţia
Producătorilor de Produse Tradiţionale şi Ecologice Satu Mare (The Association of
Traditional and Ecological Products Producers Satu Mare).
Stores for traditional products begin to open in very many areas, especially in large cities
where there is a good enough demand for traditional products. Surely the market is not
saturated with quality traditional products – with counterfeit products, unfortunately yes –
so opening a business in the domain is opportune in the present moment.
Through promoting traditional products in newspapers, magazines, on the internet we can
insure a much more complete information spread to the consumers who have the possibility
to learn from read articles, how to recognise a traditional product from a fake one among
others.
The fight between traditional and new will be one of length, the traditional gaining more
and more terrain and Romania should profit from this growing trend.

Chever, T., Renault, C., Renault, S. and Romieu, V., 2012. Value of production of
agricultural products and foodstuffs, wines, aromatised wines and spirits protected by a
geographical indication (GI). [online] Available at: <http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
external-studies/value-gi_en.htm> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Comisia Europeană, 2013. Europa tradiţiilor culinare [online] Available at:
<http://ec.europa.eu/news/agriculture/110215_ro.htm> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Costăchel - revista virtuală de gastronomie reală, 2013. În curând, produsele tradiţionale
autentice vor putea fi recunoscute după această siglă [online] Available at:
<http://costachel.ro/in-curand-produsele-traditionale-autentice-vor-putea-fi-recunoscutedupa-aceasta-sigla/#ixzz2gEy8Bv8J> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Guerrero, L., Claret, A., Verbeke, W., Enderli, G., Zakowska-Biemans, S., Vanhonacker,
F., Issanchou, S., Sajdakowska, M., Signe Granli, B., Contel, M., Hersleth, M. and
Scalvedi, L., 2010. Perception of traditional food products in six European regions using
free word association. Food Quality and Preference, 21, pp 225–233.
Guerrero, L., Dolors Guardia, M., Xicola, J., Verbeke, W., Vanhonacker, F., ZakowskaBiemans, S., Sajdakowska, M., Sulmont-Rosse, C., Issanchou, S., Contel, M., Luisa
Scalvedi, M., Signe Granli, B. and Hersleth, M., 2009. Consumer-driven deﬁnition of
traditional food products and innovation in traditional foods. A qualitative cross-cultural
study. Appetite, 52, pp. 345–354.
http://www.cdep.ro, 2010. Şedinţa Camerei Deputaţilor din 23 februarie 2010 [online]
Available at: <http://www.cdep.ro/pls/steno/steno.stenograma?idl=1&idm=1,097&ids=
6760&prn=1> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Iordan, V., 2010. Ghidul Gastronomic al României – Bucătăria tradiţională [online]
Available
at:
<http://www.houseofguides.ro/ro-ro/Gastronomica-cat32/GhidulGastronomic-al-Rom%C3%A2niei-%E2%80%93-Buc%C4%83t%C4%83riatradi%C5%
A3ional%C4%83-prod514.aspx> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Lew, A., 2013. Overseas Chinese American Foods [online] Available at:
<http://alanalew.com> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale, 2005/2006. Lapte si produse din lapte. Carne
si produse din carne. [pdf] Available at: <http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_alimentara/
judete/caras-severin.pdf> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale, 2006. Lapte si produse din lapte. [pdf]
Available at: <http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_alimentara/judete/neamt.pdf> [Accessed
25 September 2013].
Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale, 2008/2009. Lapte si produse din lapte. [pdf]
Available at: <http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_alimentara/judete/constanta. pdf>
[Accessed 25 September 2013].
Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale, 2011. Carnatii de plescoi – indicatie
geografica protejata. [pdf] Available at: <http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_
alimentara/caiet-de-sarcini-carnati-plescoi.pdf> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale, 2012. Produsele traditionale romaneşti. [pdf]
Available at: <http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_alimentara /judete/produse-traditionaleromanesti-2012.pdf> [Accessed 25 September 2013].

Ministerul Agriculturii şi Dezvoltării Rurale, 2013. Analiza socio-economica in perspectiva
dezvoltarii rurale 2014-2020. [pdf] Available at: <http://www.madr.ro/docs/ dezvoltarerurala/programare-2014-2020/analiza-dezvoltarii-rurale-agricultura-iulie-2013.pdf>
[Accessed 25 September 2013].
Oficiul naţional al produselor tradiţionale şi ecologice româneşti, 2010. Ponderea
produselor tradiţionale atestate în regiunea Dobrogea. [pdf] Available at: <
http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_alimentara/judete/constanta.pdf>
[Accessed
25
September 2013].
Oficiul naţional al produselor tradiţionale şi ecologice româneşti, 2010. Ponderea grupelor
de produse traditionale atestate la nivel regional si national. [pdf] Available at:
<http://old.madr.ro/pages/industrie_alimentara/judete/constanta.pdf>
[Accessed
25
September 2013].
Ordin nr. 690 din 28 septembrie 2004 pentru Aprobarea normei privind condiţiile şi
criteriile pentru atestarea produselor tradiţionale. [pdf] Available at: <http://old.madr.ro/
pages/industrie_alimentara/O_690_2004.pdf> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Pieniak, Z., Verbeke, W., Vanhonacker, F., Guerrero, L. and Hersleth, M., 2009.
Association between traditional food consumption and motives for food choice in six
European countries. Appetite, 53, pp. 101–108.
Popa, C., 2011. Chiar stim adevarul despre produsele traditionale ? [online] Available at:
<http://www.revista-piata.ro/Chiar_stim_adevarul_despre_produsele_traditionale_Aid6414.html> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Roman, R.A., 2001. Bucate, vinuri și obiceiuri românești, Bucharest: Ed. Paideia, p. 7
RomanianMonastarys.org,
2013.
Oltenia.
Traditii.
[online]
Available
at:
<http://www.romanianmonasteries.org/ro/romania/oltenia-traditii>
[Accessed
25
September 2013].
Simion,
A.,
2012.
Sănătate
pentru
toţi
[online]
Available
at:
<http://www.ziarconstanta.ro/stiri/sanatate-pentru-toti-21/avem-premii-vrem-retete2136/> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Sterian,
C.,
2013.
Covrigii
de
Buzău.
[online]
Available
at:
<http://www.observatorulbuzoian.ro/?p=26852> [Accessed 25 September 2013].
Steriu, V. et all, 2012. Cadrul Naţional strategic pentru dezvoltarea durabila a sectorului
agroalimentar si a spatiului rural in perioada 2014 - 2020 – 2030 [pdf] Available at:
<http://www.presidency.ro/static/Cadrul%20National%20Strategic%20Rural.pdf>
[Accessed 25 September 2013].
Trichopoulou, A., Soukara, S. and Vaşilopoulou, E., 2007. Traditional foods: Why and how
to sustain them. Trends in Food Science & Tehnology, 18, pp. 420 -427.
Trichopoulou, A., Vasilopoulou, E., Georga, K., Soukara, S. and Dilis, V., 2006.
Traditional foods: Why and how to sustain them. Trends in Food Science & Tehnology,
17, pp. 498–504.
www.bucataras.ro, 2013. Produse traditionale – zona Oltenia. [online] Available at:
<http://www.bucataras.ro/articole/produse-traditionalezona-moldovamuntenia-si-oltenia45857.html?action=print> [Accessed 25 September 2013].

