Fair Trade in Sustainable Development
The Potential for Fair Trade Market Growth in Poland

AE

FAIR TRADE IN SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
THE POTENTIAL FOR FAIRTRADE MARKET GROWTH IN POLAND
Grażyna Śmigielska1, Anna Dąbrowska2 and Małgorzata Radziukiewicz3
1)
Cracow University of Economics, Poland
2)3)
Institute for Market, Consumption and Business Cycles Research,
Warsaw, Poland

Please cite this article as:
Śmigielska, G., Dąbrowska, A. and Radziukiewicz, M., 2015. Fair Trade in Sustainable
Development. The Potential for Fair Trade Market Growth in Poland. Amfiteatru
Economic, 17 (Special No. 9), pp. 1244-1258

Abstract
The paper presents the concept of Fair Trade, which is considered an alternative to
conventional trade, and becomes increasingly popular in the Western countries. In addition,
some results of empirical research, conveyed in Poland and aimed at diagnosis and
assessment of Fairtrade products market, are provided. Fair trade is analysed not only in the
broad theoretical context which shows its contribution to sustainable development and
relation to corporate social responsibility, but also in the framework of supply chains
management. The benefits from the Fairtrade label, including transaction costs reduction
are indicated. The assumption is that to achieve them, consumer acceptance of the idea and
willingness to buy Fairtrade products are necessary. The empirical research was focused on
answering the question whether a market niche for Fairtrade goods exists in Poland and
how to develop it by the means of communication tools. The market niche, although very
small, has been identified and described. It is apparent that, in order to develop it, a public
policy, aimed at raising the awareness of Fair Trade idea, is necessary as well as marketing
activities like social marketing Internet campaigns and better and more prominently
products display.
Keywords: Fair Trade, Fairtrade, sustainable development, corporate social responsibility,
consumer attitude
JEL Classification: F13, O15, M14

Corresponding

1244

The intense competition for scarce resources and globalization processes which started in
the second part of XXth century sparked a debate about side effects of these processes
which include degradation of natural environment as well as growing disproportion of
income between developed and less developed countries. At the end of the century, United
Nations and other international institutions alerted world society and launched campaigns
towards more sustainable development which meets the needs of current generations
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. One of the
concepts which are often associated with the sustainable development is Fair Trade (FT).
FT is a trading partnership, based on dialogue, transparency and respect, which seeks
greater equity in international trade but also labelling initiative. The notion “Fair Trade”
refers to general initiative whereas “Fairtrade” is the certification mark managed by
Fairtrade International organization which addresses the products to the specific market
segment (Dragusanu, Giovannucci and Nunn, 2014). This market segment’s consumers
“agree” to pay the premium price for the goods to support their producers and the regions
they live in as well as to contribute to the environment protection. Goods sold with the FT
label include bananas, sugar, cocoa, coffee, flowers, cotton seed and tea and they are
produced in three regions: mainly in Africa and the Middle East, but also in Latin America
and the Caribbean as well as in Asia and Oceania.
The concept of FT trade is possible to implement in the societies of the countries where
consumers have freedom of choice (they are sovereign), they have competences to take
rational decisions and take responsibility for them. Its progress, as well as contribution to
sustainable development, is monitored in the well developed countries (e.g. Fair Trade
USA, 2014) but there is still lack of knowledge as to the situation in so called transition
economies like Poland.
In Poland, sustainable development is entered in the Basic Law (Article 5 of the
Constitution of the Republic of Poland). This is also the subject of governmental
documents; inter alia, Strategia Edukacjidla Zrównoważonego Rozwoju [Strategy of
Education for Sustainable Development] (Ministerstwo Środowiska, 2008). This opens up
the opportunity to introduce the Fair Trade concept to the programmes on sustainable
development and sustainable consumption. One of the institutions promoting this idea in
Poland is Polskie Stowarzyszenie Sprawiedliwego Handlu. Trzeci Świati My (The Polish
Association of Fair Trade. Third World and We). It sells quite a wide range of FT products
via the Internet, promotes the whole idea but it does not provide information about
consumer attitude which is a key factor of the concept development.
Fair Trade is relatively new, noble and at the same time, controversial. Adherents usually
stress the moral, solidarity and ethical aspect of it. Opponents try to prove the harmfulness
of FT to the global economy. Certainly it is not the first concept which has tried to
reconcile the objective of economic and social activity.
This paper discusses the idea of Fair Trade, sustainable development and corporate social
responsibility (CSR) in the context of some challenges of contemporary economy which
include the competitiveness of supply chains. Per analogy to CSR it is shown that in supply
chains of FT products the reduction of transaction costs is possible. The assumption is made

that in order to be successful the market segment for FT goods must exist. Its identification
is the main goal of the research whose methodology and results are presented.
1. Fair trade contribution to sustainable development
Fair Trade is not an organization but rather a movement or general concept which could be
traced from XIX century although it has been developed in the Western nations for the last
40 years (Brussels Rural Development Briefings, 2014, p.4). The growing popularity over
the last three decades results from “increasing interaction of corporations in its networks
and more specifically the fair trade certificate bodies” (Reed, 2009, p. 4). FINE (the name
comes from founders - four Fair Trade networking organizations - FLO, IFAT, NEWS,
EFTA) has defined FT asa trading partnership, based on dialogue, transparency and respect
which seeks greater equity in international trade (Brussels Rural Development Briefings,
2014, p.4).FT tries to become the alternative to conventional trade in a contemporary
economy characterized by aggressive competition directed towards cost reduction. Cost
reduction in global economy is often achieved by the use of lower-cost labour (Kogut,
1985) by production in or procurement from developing nations (Stafańska and Stefański,
2015, p. 89). It raises the problem of unequal income distribution which makes the rich
richer and poor poorer. he aim of FT is to reduce these disproportions.
“Fair trade organizations, backed by consumers, are engaged actively in supporting
producers, raising awareness and in campaigning for changes in the rules and practice of
conventional international trade” (Fairtrade International, 2013, p.7). The key players are:
Fair Trade Producers which usually represent co-operative or associations in developing
countries, retailers which sell FT product to the consumers and other organizations e.g. The
Fairtrade Labelling Organization. So originally Fair Trade was only a movement whereas
now it is institutionalized and organizations labelling the products play an important role. In
a narrow sense FT means buying the products from the producers in developing countries
on terms that are more favourable than free market terms and marketing those products in
developed countries at the “ethical price premium“ (De Pelsmacker, Jamssens and
Mielants, 2005, p. 51; Stefańska andNestorowicz, 2015, p. 35).
The FT idea fits perfectly with the concept of sustainable development. This concept was
introduced for the first time by the World Commission on Environment and Development
in 1987 and it was defined as “Development which meets the needs of current generations
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (United
Nations, 1987, p.11). The Commission stresses that it means not only counteracting
degradation of the environment, but also attitudes towards meeting needs of the society as a
whole (fight against destitution and poverty), pursuit to set up the market system based
more on cooperation than competition as well as in opposing degradation of the cultural
variety and tradition (Dąbrowska et al., 2015).
The milestone for advancement of sustainable development and implementation of its
programmes into local life become Agenda 21 which is one of the basic documents of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Earth Summit) which took
place in Rio de Janeiro, in 1992 (Pearcy and Schrock, 2014). The document, and its
strategic nature, includes a set of recommendations and direction of measures to be taken
for sustainable development in the perspective of the 21 st Century and how to plan the
social and economic development so as not to harm the natural environment. The main
presumption of it is that both rich and poor countries have different problems, and their
21 sets forth for each social group, both formal and informal, an important role in the
process of sustainable development. In this sense, it directly concerns consumers.
So FT by offering better trading conditions to, and securing the rights of, marginalized
producers and workers – especially in the South supports the idea of sustainable
development. It is implemented by defining the rules of cooperation between producers,
intermediaries and final buyers which protect the weakest partner (Nicholls, 2002, p.7 ).
Contribution to sustainable development is also made by fulfilling several other FT goals
like: developing the long term buyer – seller relationships that facilitate greater access to
financing for producers, improving working conditions, developing the producer or workers
organizations, contributing to the regional development by e.g. donations for education and
respecting the environment (Dragusanu, Giovannucci and Nunn, 2014).
As such Fair Trade has become an excellent part of the Millennium Development Goals
adopted by the UN in 2000 (UN, 2000), as it contributes to a stable and sustainable
development and helps to combat poverty. As stressed by Pongratz-Chander (2014, p. 234)
it can be located within the sustainable development approach to development because it
recognizes that any project must take into account the social and environmental costs of
doing business.
2. The economics of Fair Trade
FT is the concept which on one hand operates against the market while on the other it has to
use market mechanism to achieve economic goals of sustainable development. Using
market mechanism means the Fairtrade goods must be competitive. They have to target the
consumers who by their consumer decisions would like to exert a real impact on
improvement of living standards of the poorest communities and contribute to protection of
the environment.
Nowadays an important role in FT supply chains is played by global retailers. A lot of them
are now involved in selling Fairtrade products and include these activities in their corporate
social responsibility reports. As the concept of CSR has evolved, many definitions of this
term are found in literature (Dahlsrud, 2008), but one of the most cited, which is also
recognized by the European Commission sees CSR as “a concept whereby companies
integrate social and environmental concerns in their business operations and their interactions
with the stakeholders on a voluntary basis” (Commission of the European Communities,
2001, p. 8). So the idea of Fair Trade when applied by corporations becomes part of it.
CSR, as pointed out by Dinu (2011, p.6), “…does not mean charity, nor study for the public
relations department, but a smart investment, bringing benefits not only for the company,
but also for the entire community, as it contributes towards: improving the relationship with
the community (clients, suppliers, authorities); influencing the targeted audience, key
leaders, press, etc.”. The CSR strategy should also contribute to company competitive
advantage (Porter and Kramer, 2006; Miron, 2011). It raises the question if engagement in
selling Fairtrade products could bring profits to the intermediaries.
Taking the view of Christopher (1992) that nowadays competition among individual
companies is less important than among the supply chains, managers have to strive to
achieve the effective and efficient supply chains which are able to create the competitive
advantage (Christopher and Peck, 2004). J.M. Cruz (2009) noticed that companies are more
and more interested in including CSR practices in supply chain management (SCM);
therefore CSR in SCM could be considered as the next stage for SCM development
(Śmigielska, 2013). Growing interest in FT and the problems of supply chain management
encourage Karjalaimen and Moxham (2013) to investigate the possibilities of integrating
Fair Trade and Supply Chain Management Research. They provide the structure of FT
supply chain (figure no. 1):

Figure no. 1: The structure of FT supply chain
Source: Karjalaimen and Moxham, 2013
In this model ATOs represent the alternative trading organizations. It differs from the
global supply chains, inter alia, the distance from the producer to the consumer is
shortened. It reduces the transaction costdue to good reputation, reduction of uncertainty
and improvement of information about the partners in transaction (Vuta et al., 2007).
The concept of transaction cost economics (TCE) has developed since 1937 when R. Coase
published his famous paper “The Nature of the Firm” to become one of the most important
schools of contemporary economy. R. Coase and then O. Williamson originally applied it
mainly to the problems related to choice the governance structure between market and firm,
and designing the internal organization of firm (Williamson, 1981). But due to the fact that
this concept could be applied to “Any issue that arises as or can be recognized as a
contracting problem can be examined to the advantage in TCE terms” (Williamson, 2005,
p. 2), it is now applied to many different problems, including vertical cooperation. It is also
used to explain a wide range of marketing phenomena, e.g. problems of developing value
for the consumers and brand equity.
From the marketing point of view, the reputation, embodied in the Fairtrade label, has
similar advantages as an eco-label, which has been identified by Dinu (2012). Referring to
FT they include:
 Targeting a sustainable society as it contributes to the better lives of the people
living in the poorest regions of the world as well as protecting the environment,
 Promoting good quality products with minimum impact on environment,
chain inform the consumers from the FT segment about the characteristics of the products
which are important for them and in this way reduce their uncertainty.
Such a reputation reduces of transaction costs what gives the economic justification to the
costs related to the process of obtaining the Fairtrade label. When applying the arguments
of Klein and Leffler (1981) to the consumers of Fairtrade products are willing to pay the
premium price for the FT label because with it they get reliable information about the
process of their production and distribution which is important for them. So the label as
well as visible packing and good exposure in the store assists them greatly in making a
choice, reducing time taken in searching for information to a minimum. By buying FT
product the consumers justify the safeguard mechanism involved in monitoring, control and
labelling the product (Fernández-Barcala and González-Diaz, 2006).
The FT label could also be considered as a private label for the supply chain of Fairtrade
product which operates in parallel with conventional trading mechanisms (Vieira and
Aguiar, 2009, p. 14). So some research which shows how private label can reduce the
transaction cost (Śmigielska, 2009; Karjalainen and Moxham, 2013; Nowak, 2015) could
also be applied.
But what is really crucial for the success of FT products is consumer attitude. Consumer
preferences and attitudes have fostered the FT movement, and nowadays they “vote” for its
further development by their buying decision. So the strategies of supply chains delivering
the Fairtrade products are rather pull than push. Knowing their preferences and promoting
sustainable consumption plays an important role in addressing global problems. Key in
changing consumption behaviours towards sustainable ones is increasing our knowledge
about the current state of consumption behaviour (Pearcy and Schrock, 2014).
3.Market for Fair Trade product in Poland – results of the research
3.1.Research objective and methodology
Implementation of the project “Rynekproduktów Sprawiedliwego Handlu w Polsce”
[Market for Fair Trade Products in Poland], financed by resources of the National Science
Centre, No. 2011/03/B/HS4/03727, carried out at the Institute for Market, Consumption
and Business Cycles Research (Instytut Badań Rynku, Konsumpcjii Koniunktur), was the
first attempt of a complex diagnosis and assessment of the Fair Trade market in this
country.
The main objective of the research was the diagnosis and assessment of the development of
the market for Fair Trade products in Poland. Findings of the empirical research (qualitative
and quantitative) carried out within the project in summer 2013 allowed for acquisition of
new knowledge on consumers, particularly on their purchasing behaviour towards products
with the Fairtrade logo and the level of consumer awareness.
The research outcomes provided for an answer, inter alia, to the following question: Who is
the consumer of Fair Trade products (the purchasers’ demographic and psychographic
profile)?

Within the framework of qualitative research focused on recognition of the Fair Trade
products awareness by Polish consumers, there were conducted:
 4 focus-group interviews (FGI) with consumers of Fair Trade products.
The focus group interviews comprised 6 participants in each group recruited at sales points,
and they took place in the three agglomerations with the biggest network of Point of Sales
(POS) with Fair Trade products: in Warsaw (2 meetings), in Cracow (1), and in Gdansk (1).
In the three meetings, respondents were consumers who were aware of the Fair Trade idea
who regularly bought Fair Trade products, while in one, the consumers though being aware
of the Fair Trade idea, nevertheless bought only sporadically and did not provide
themselves with Fair Trade products on a regular basis (Warsaw, Cracow and Gdansk);
 10 undisguised participant observations with consumers of Fair Trade
products.
The group of 10 individuals were exclusively those who buy Fair Trade products. In the
course of meetings in Warsaw and Cracow, the buyers’ favourite shops were visited. An
integral part of the meetings was an interview/talk, conducted on the base of scenario,
touching upon various issues of Fair Trade. This form of meetings facilitated a better, indepth insight into consumer habits and choices of the interviewees;
 11 interviews with experts.
The interviews with consumers were supplemented with conversations with experts: shop
owners, producers, volunteers, and employees of the organisations dealing with Fair Trade
(first of all, those associated in the Fair Trade Coalition) as well as with other individuals
encountered in their activities Fair Trade issues (cooks known from TV programmes, a
journalist of the magazine devoted to vegetarianism, a lecturer holding classes on ethical
fashion).
In turn, within the framework of quantitative research, four separate surveys were carried
out:
 one preliminary study, the omnibus Poles on Fair Trade, on the national
representative sample (N=1002 at the age of 15-74 years);
 two surveys, the omnibuses Big cities inhabitants on Fair Trade were carried out in
towns inhabited by more than 100 thousand residents (N=295);
 one survey, Consumers of Fair Trade products, the standardised questionnaire-based
interview (face-to-face interviews) with 400 consumers choosing those products at POS of
Fair Trade products in five cities: Kielce, Poznan, Warsaw, Wroclaw, and the Tricity
(Gdansk, Gdynia and Sopot).

3.2 Demographic and economic profile of consumers of Fair Trade products
The Fair Trade idea – as the idea connected with the guarantee of fair remuneration for the
work being performed, and the reduction of the distance between the producer and the
consumer – does not arouse any great interest in Polish consumers. The interest in it was
declared by slightly more than 1/3 of the respondents (35%), of which 30% are rather

respondents are definitely not interested.
The individuals interested in Fair Trade are primarily women, most often buying foods for
households, and therefore have more opportunities to learn about Fair Trade products. The
biggest accessibility (the biggest number of POS) for those products is in big cities (with more
than 500 000 inhabitants), which certainly affects consumers’ awareness of the FT idea.
The consumer interested in the Fair Trade idea is at the age of 50-59 years, resides in an
agglomeration above 500 000 inhabitants. He/she is a married person, well-educated (with
higher education) and working, free of financial troubles (their household’s monthly
income exceeds 1 200 EURO, and the consumer’s net monthly income is above 600
EURO) (table no. 1).
Table no. 1: Profile of consumers interested and not interested in the idea of Fair
Trade
Interested in FT
Woman
50-59 years old
Cities above 500 000*
Married
Higher
Working*
Above 600 EURO*

Consumers characteristics
Not interested in FT
Sex
Man
Age
Up to 39, 60+ years old
Residence
Cities 100-500 000.*
Marital status
Divorced/in separation
Education
Primary
Vocational status
Out of work*
Respondent’s net monthly income Up to 365 EURO*
Respondent’s household net
Above 1 200 EURO*
486-714 EURO
monthly income
Note: *Statistically significant dependence
Source: Author’s own research “Polacy o Sprawiedliwym Handlu” [Poles on Fair Trade]
(N=1002)
3.3. Perception of the idea of Fair Trade. Sources of information
The term Fair Trade in its Polish version (Sprawiedliwy Handel) is poorly recognisable.
Poles are more familiar with the term in English, Fair Trade. It is often associated with a
whole spectrum of topics related to conscious consumption, inter alia, with the struggle for
fair working conditions at industrial enterprises, with buying products directly from
producers, or with less frequent shopping in the retail chains known for unethical attitudes
towards employees and the natural environment (figure no. 2).
The key was presentation of FT as an aid system – here the impact of FT on individual
farmers was primarily emphasised. FT was then narrowed to Fairtrade certified products
and it was mainly perceived as a way of subsidising farmers from poor countries of Asia,
Africa and South America. The aid role of FT was primarily emphasised by the individuals
who searched for Fair Trade products occasionally, and they were interested in the issues of
working conditions in the countries of Global South exclusively on the occasion of reports
on accidents related to failure to obey safety standards (as in the case of the disaster at the
clothing factory in Bangladesh in 2013).

Figure no. 2: Narration on Fair Trade
Source: Authors’ own research: FGI with consumers on Fair Trade product
The consumers interested in the Fair Trade idea associate it, first of all, with respect for
another human being, their dignity, rights and needs (31% of indications with the option to
choose three) as well as with concern for the consumer (28%), but also with the activity
carried out by people for people, and concern for the natural environment, proper lifestyle,
responsible consumption and economic activity as well as with promotion of human
responsibility (all above 20% of indications). Only a few associate the FT idea with the
global movement in the social economy stream which admits that the human being is more
important than profit.
In turn, the consumers buying at Fair Trade POS (Tricity, Kielce, Poznan, Warsaw, and
Wroclaw) associated Fair Trade, first of all, with:
 no exploitation of workers, with their fair salary, and denial to employ children
(54%),
 ethical production and sale/fair remuneration for the producer (31%),
 promoting products from the Third World countries (11%).
Concern for the natural environment, ecological products, and high quality of products are
the associations identified with FT by few respondents (they did not exceed the threshold of
5% of indications).
The perception of the social problems solved by the FT by respondents, taking part in
preliminary study, is shown on figure no.3.
Among the social problems, which Fair Trade resolves, the biggest number of people (the
highest per cent of responses) indicated fight against poverty, denial to employ children,
and providing equal opportunities (above 25%). The lowest appreciation among the
specified social problems being resolved by Fair Trade was attributed to “assignment of
resources to important social goals meeting the majority’s expectations” and “assignment of
resources to education” (below 11%).

Source: Authors’ own research “Polacy o Sprawiedliwym Handlu” (N=1002)
The basic source of information on the Fair Trade idea indicated by consumers was the
Internet (figure no.4).

Figure no. 4: Sources of information about Fair Trade
Source: Authors’ own research, “Konsumenciproduktów Sprawiedliwego Handlu”
[Consumers of Fair Trade products] (N=400)
For consumers buying Fair Trade products, inhabitants of the cities: Tricity, Kielce,
Poznan, Warsaw, Wroclaw, the main source of information on the Fair Trade idea, besides
the Internet (32%), was friends (29%).Other sources of information, such as
newspapers/journals, shops, radio and TV as well as labels/packaging, are of minor
importance. This source of information on FT was indicated by only a small percentage of
consumers of FT products (from 11% to 6%). A small group of those buying these products
encountered the FT idea while carrying out their activities in non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) or while organising conferences or meetings on the FT issue (1%); a
little bit more, i.e. 4%, encountered the FT idea during trips abroad.

4. Discussion
Fair Trade was originally the idea of consumers who wanted to help the people from less
developed countries. The products were initially sold in churches and small charity shops
so the relations between the sellers and buyers were taken on trust (Vieira and Aguiar,
2009, p.15). At the second stage of FT development (70.ties) the ATO’s become involved.
Their social purpose is to keep the small producers in mind (Reed, 2008). In 1988 the Max
Havelaar Foundation which is recognized as the first labelling organization was founded.
The spectacular growth of Fairtrade was noticed when the retail corporations became
involved in it. As a consequence of market development and its institutionalization four
variants of the Fair Trade value chain, characterized by different benefits and risks, were
proposed by Reed (2009). Research conveyed on the coffee market has shown that largescale players gain more from FT then ATO’s (Joo, 2010). In the models with the
corporation involvement, inter alia, the problems with small producers marginalization, not
fulfilling FT standards and discouraging the consumers who do not trust corporations are
mentioned. So on one hand corporations help a lot in promoting the FT idea whereas on the
other hand there are some potential threats related to their participation which also affect
sustainable development. One of the most important problems is premium sharing among
the participants of the supply chain.
The process of certification is expensive which raises the price of the product and positions
it in the premium segment. The growth of this segment in well developed countries meant
the big retail chains became involved in selling them. As a consequence in the largest
market for Fairtrade products in Europe – Germany, Holland and UK - they could be found
not only in speciality stores but also in FMCG chains, vending machines, coffee shops,
service stations, and so on. Retail chains that include selling FT products in their CSR
activities also embarked on their own fair-trade initiatives which meant taking control over
the supply channel and labelling the product. For example Marks&Spencer carrying only
own-brand products in 2010 claimed that its fair-trading commitment benefited over one
million farmers and workers (Vieira and Aguiar, 2009, p.16). The wide distribution raises
the question about goods quality. As noticed by Auger et al. (2003) consumers are willing
to pay more for the product with certain ethical attributes, but are not willing to sacrifice
product quality or features for more socially acceptable products.
As a consequence of the retail globalisation process the Fair Trade products have been
brought by the FMCG mass merchandisers to the less developed markets like Poland. Also
Polish entrepreneurs encouraged by the success of the ecological product started to be
interested in FT as a way of differentiation and avoidance of price competition which is
very intense. It begs the question if Poland is a good market when it never gained benefits
from the colonies and still has a large economic gap to overcome to be among the most
developed countries. When comparing the GDP of Poland per capita with the countries
which offer FT in South America like Colombia or Peru it is not even twice as high. Poland
has21 100$ whereas Colombia and Peru about 11 000$ (data on 1 January, 2014, CIA
World Fact Book), Mexico in Central America has 15 600$. But the situation is different

Uganda – 1500$, Ethiopia-1 300$, or Malawi – 900$. Hence, it seems that there may be
some room for the FT products in Poland. Poland is still a middle income country – not as
rich as Germany or the U.K. – but consumers in Poland may become more aware of the fact
that they are much better off than people in many African or even Latin American
countries. And the lack of cultural ties with poor countries – for example, former colonies –
does not need to be an obstacle in developing Free Trade.
As already mentioned, the results of the research show that there is a market niche for FT
products. The FT products consumer, aged 50-59 years, often women, reside in an
agglomeration above 500 000 inhabitants. He/she is a married person, well-educated (with
higher education) and working, free of financial troubles (their household’s monthly
income exceeds 1200 EURO, and the consumer’s net monthly income is above 600 EURO)
It is generally consistent with the Memery, Megicks and Williams (2005) findings which
are the result of studying a wide spectrum of research conveyed to segment the consumers
according to their specific ethical and social responsibility concerns. They reported that
most of the literature has identified ethical and socially responsible consumers as being
younger, well-educated, idle and upper class (Kinnear, Taylor and Ahmed, 1974,
Arbuthnot, 1977, Van Liere and Dunlap, 1980), and predominantly female. The only
discrepancy concerns age, which is the result of the fact that generally young people only
take into account quality for money in their buying decisions. Besides these characteristics
life style (which was not taken into account in the search conveyed in Poland) is also
important as far as environmental issues are concerned (Webster, 1975; Anderson and
Cunningham, 1972).
Referring to the communication process the results of Pearcy and Schrock (2014) have been
supported which means that social media which combine Internet and friends could play a
crucial role in raising awareness and knowledge about FairTrade. Further research on big
international chains operating in Poland as well as government involvement in the FT
promotion could be undertaken to contribute to general knowledge about “state- of-the-art”
of this phenomenon.

Conclusion
The Fair Trade movement contributes to sustainable development. This concept draws
more and more consumers’ and intermediaries’ attention in well developed countries. It
turns out that, as in the case of CSR, selling the Fair Trade product could raise the
competitiveness of a supply chain due to the reduction of transaction costs and targeting the
consumers from the market segment which is growing. These consumers are prepared to
pay the premium price to contribute to sustainable development.
As far as Poland is concerned the growth of demand for FT products will depend on
overcoming the barriers which include: the lack of consumer knowledge, low purchasing
power as well as changes in the conviction of the need to resolve the priority, national
social and ecological problems. Fairtrade certified products should also be better displayed.
Educational activities targeting all age groups, and focusing on the youngest consumers,
whose buying behaviour is being shaped, should not be neglected. In the opinion of buyers
of FT products, what should mostly encourage Poles to buy the products complying with

the Fair Trade concept are social marketing campaigns on the Internet and in magazines as
well as better displays of Fairtrade products in the shops.

