Challenge
As part of PwC’s overarching narrative for the T20, we discuss how three drivers of change –
globalisation, technological advances and “financialisation” – have historically served humanity
well by typically delivering both economic growth and social progress. However as these
drivers have accelerated, evolved and become intertwined over time, divergence between
economic growth and social progress has occurred placing people and the planet under
substantial strain. In this paper we look forward to how today’s technological-driven revolution
– the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) 1 – can course correct this trend, with the right
governance, enabling environment and public-private partnerships.
Humanity stands at an important moment in history. The global, digitally-enabled 4IR is already
the fastest period of innovation ever. It is underpinned by rapid advances in technologies
including artificial intelligence (PwC 2016), robotics, the internet of things, nanotechnology and
biotechnology, to name a few. The disruption of many traditional markets and industries is
already underway. How can we shape these transformations to address society’s and the Earth’s
most pressing challenges, and not exacerbate them?
Previous industrial revolutions advanced economic development but have largely come at the
expense of the planet. Today there is mounting scientific consensus that Earth’s systems are
under unprecedented stress. Scientists at the Stockholm Environment Institute have identified
that four out of the Earth’s nine ‘Planetary Boundaries’ have already been crossed, namely
climate, biodiversity, land-system change and biogeochemical cycles (Steffen et al., 2015).
Risks will only heighten as population swells to a projected 9 billion by 2050, increasing food,
materials and energy needs. In parallel, society today is under growing social and economic
strain, from mounting inequality, youth unemployment, automation, geopolitical volatility and
nationalism.
These global challenges of today are framed by the UN’s 17 Global Goals for Sustainable
Development (SDGs) (United Nations, 2017b). Agreed by 193 countries in 2015, the SDGs
provide an action agenda for people and the planet out to 2030. There is a window of
opportunity now, to make the sweeping advances of the 4IR help governments, business and
society to achieve these goals, not make them harder to attain.
For governments and policy makers, it is vital that the enabling mechanisms are put in place for
the 4IR to be a sustainable revolution. The innovations and economic value unlocked by the 4IR
must maximise positive social and environmental impacts, and avoid exacerbating today’s most
pressing challenges. The governance challenge is even greater than in previous industrial
revolutions due to the complexity, pace, and global and sectoral breadth of change. Zero-cost
digital distribution today enables products and services to penetrate the mainstream and ‘go
global’ in a matter of months, with policy and regulation often struggling to keep up. One
example of this challenge is the high profile OECD BEPS initiative now being implemented to address tensions in the international tax system created in part by the impact of technology on
business and how multinational companies invest (OECD, 2017).
For the 4IR to be the first sustainable industrial revolution, governments and regulators will
need to adapt quickly with the rapidly evolving 4IR landscape and provide the enabling
environment, safeguards, investment and oversight to guide the future that is being built.
Support and partnerships will be needed to unlock and scale innovation on emerging - and
potentially game-changing - technologies and solutions for people and the planet. And foresight,
public policies and technological governance will be needed to avoid or minimise unintended
consequences and protect public interests.

Proposal
Amid a rapidly changing innovation landscape, we have identified 10 emerging 4IR
technologies that we think could individually and collectively have the greatest impact on jobs,
livelihoods, and environments (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Ten emerging 4IR technologies for the Earth

To harness the potential that these technologies promise for people and the planet, governments
and policy makers need to go beyond simply accelerating innovation, and take a more
comprehensive approach. This includes: (a) building the global governance structures and
policy mechanisms to address the unintended environmental and social consequences of change;
and (b) unlocking and scaling 4IR innovations that maximise progress towards the SDGs including innovations that respond to the new risks and challenges presented by the 4IR itself
(Figure 2). In practice, this will often involve ‘open innovation’ across the full ecosystem of
actors, collaborating to develop and shape our future world.
Figure 2: A comprehensive response to the pace and scale of 4IR innovation

Source: PwC

Policy and governance responses to mitigate negative risks and impacts of the 4IR
We have identified four areas where the 4IR poses governance challenges and opportunities that
are unlike the previous three industrial revolutions (the third starting almost 40 years ago). First,
the 4IR is moving at lightning speed driven by exponential computing power, the internet,
mobile infrastructure, and global competition. By contrast, governance structures typically
move at a much slower, analogue, pace. There is therefore the potential for governance, policy
and regulation to lag far behind new systems, industries and solutions in the 4IR. Second, trust
in society of institutions is at post-WWII lows in many western economies; fear of what
technology might do for jobs, livelihoods, and society is also rising. Third, the environmental
and social impacts of technology on sectors, labour markets, activities, and products is better
understood now than during previous industrial revolutions. Finally, through the global connectivity and reach enabled by the digital platforms, social networks, and technologies
which underpin the 4IR, coherence and effectiveness of policy, and oversight across borders, is
increasingly challenging in the absence of a global regime for technological governance.
Given these four overarching considerations, it will be essential for international organisations
and national governments to explore this topic more fully across a range of areas. Importantly,
governance structures will need to be updated and refocused to keep pace with the rapidlydeveloping 4IR-enabled digital economy. In particular, as 4IR technologies are designed,
deployed and scaled, environmental and social impacts will need to be considered upfront to
minimise harmful unintended consequences and to embed resilience and sustainability in
emerging global systems.
A number of mainstream 4IR advances could have unintended negative consequences, or
introduce negative risks, that need to be minimised. Below is a selection of illustrative examples
of emerging technologies, potential unintended consequences, and examples of the roles of
public policy (Table 1).
Table 1: Selected 4IR technologies, example unintended consequences, and potential policy responses
Emerging technology
Artificial Intelligence

Example unintended consequences


Automation leading to reduced jobs in
services and other sectors with a
potential to exacerbate rising inequity in
society. Adoption of automation at
varying speeds can also impact the GDP
share of each industry, increasing
fragility of the economy.
Tax base eroded as the current system is
based on people in a national state
‘bricks-and-mortar’ world and is
struggling to keep pace with the
globalised digital economy.
Technological proliferation driving
down the prices of goods and services.
Ethical concerns arising from inherent
biases contained within the datasets
used to train algorithms, could result in
the amplification of discriminatory
decision making.
Development of new ethical dimemmas
not thoughts about before e.g.
accountability and liability as regards
incorrect autonomous medical diagnosis
or accidents caused by autonomous
vehicles
‘Misuse of AI’ concerns as many of the
algorithms being developed with a good
goal (e.g. autonomous vehicles) can be
repurposed for harm (e.g. autonomus
weaponry), which raises new risks for
global safety.

Role of public policy

Structural policy initiatives to ensure
that resources and employment can
flow between sectors so that those
whose jobs (or activities) are most at
risk of automation are proactively
retrained.
A re-think as to how workforces are
trained as people need to retool almost
continuously as AI becomes more
advanced.
A re-evaluation of the tax system will
be required as automation changes the
tasks which workers will do and
potentially reduces the number of jobs
available. How tax is collected will
also need to be modernised - this may
include blockchain applications.
Universal Basic Income is one of a
number of options being explored in
several countries.
The development of ‘responsible AI’
frameworks are now gaining
momentum driven by several global
and country-level initiatives.
Governance to create explainability,
transparency and validity in the
algorithms, including drawing lines
between beneficial and harmful AI.
Public policy also has an increasingly
important role to play in data
ownership, privacy and security.

Internet of Things

●

●

●

Blockchain

●

●

●

Significant increase in energy use from
the expanding network of 23 billion
connected energy-consuming devices
today to 50 billion by 2020, energy
efficiency must become a critical
common feature of this vast network of
devices, sensors and appliances,
including responsible disposal of the
increased amount of devices.
Increased vulnerability to data breaches
and cyber security issues, given the
huge connected network of less secure
devices and advances in Botnets and
malware enabling access and
manipulation of more sensitive areas of
the network for fraud and cybercrime.
E.g. targeting an oil refinery, power
plant, online accounts, or even one’s
home.
Brittleness of IoT dependent system to
network and / or grid failure.

●

Large amounts of energy used in the
mining process behind its most popular
cryptocurrency – Bitcoin. The Bitcoin
mining process requires ‘proof of work’
(POW) protocols that by design
necessitate increasingly powerful
computers and dedicated data centres as
more miners join, which in turn
increases energy consumption.
Tracking provenance in some industries,
to authenticate products and remove
counterfeits, could significantly increase
costs in developing countries (e.g. for
medicines).
Growth of shadow-economies that are
difficult to regulate and control.

●

●

●

●

●

Government-led standards and
incentives to limit and, over time,
reduce energy consumption from
devices, sensors and appliances.
Government can work alongside
industry and ICT sector leadership,
e.g. GeSI25 (GeSI, 2017). to
contribute to increasing the role of
renewable energy sources in the
energy mix.
Cybersecurity and data privacy need
to be addressed. Government-led
standards around IoT device security
should be strongly considered.
Measures to upcycle rather than
recycle resources used.

Government-led standards and
policies to standardise ‘Proof of
Concept’ (POC) to lower energy
consumption solutions and enable
access to a global distributed ledger.
Regulation to secure and standardise
digital identity input to authenticate
users. This digital identity data must
be managed by a trusted party,
otherwise data exploitation might
prevail.

Autonomous
(land based)

Vehicles ●
●

●

●
●
●

Drones

●

●
●
●

Cloud services

●
●

Job losses, including for many taxi and
lorry drivers, as traditional occupations
become increasingly obsolete.
Inequality could rise as AVs replace a
swathe of traditional low to mediumskilled roles while the AV sector is
likely to provide fewer, but higherskilled, alternatives.
Potential rebound effect where demand
for car-related travel could increase due
to convenience and enhanced
affordability of AVs.
Mass transport demand could decline as
single use AVs become more desirable
and AV ride services more affordable.
Pollution and congestion could rise if
the absolute number of AV combustionengine vehicle kilometres increases.
Property prices could be impacted as
AVs change the location in which
people choose to live e.g. longer
commutes could become more appealing
if car travel time is productive.

●

Drones invading people’s personal
space/privacy creating demand for a
policy framework to address those
consequences.
Increased noise pollution from
propeller-based drones flying at low
altitude.
Spying and / or terrorism threats from
drones being used as a medium for
nuisance or attack.
Loss of specialist jobs e.g. sewage
cleaner, pipelines monitoring etc. due to
use of drones coupled with specialised
equipment.

●

Hyper-scale data centres using huge
amounts of energy even if the solutions
they power can save energy.
Data breaches, cyber security risks on
rise, driven by trend towards cloud
computing.

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

Policies to address the structural shifts
and distribution effects of changing
employment patterns. This could
include retraining policies for drivers
who lose their jobs to provide
opportunities and openings in other
sectors.
Government policy to manage the air
pollution and climate-related impacts
of AVs. This may well include
standards to ensure AV fleets are low
or zero emissions.
Investment in ‘smart city’
infrastructure and technology, to
maximise AV efficiency e.g. through
the promotion of car sharing.
Introduction of policies related to AV
security and safety (both cyber and
physical).
Government guidance on liability
implications or AVs. Investment in
connected urban mobility systems to
counteract potential increase in vehicle
numbers with optimised transport
routing and management.
Government policy to manage drone
noise pollution, creating a framework
for licensing, registration and safe
operations.
Aviation regulators creating
droneways/drone highways or setting
operational aspects of where drones
can fly.
Health and safety framework for drone
deployment and usage.
3D mapping policy to ensure there is a
relevant structure in place to help
capture national survey information.

Standards or Voluntary Agreements
for companies to power their energyhungry data centres from 100%
renewable energy. Some tech firms
have committed to this e.g. the 100%
renewables commitment made by
Google, Microsoft, Apple, Facebook,
Salesforce, BT Group and others.
Policy role for standards to eliminate
threats, technology risks, and
safeguards for cloud environments.
Work of the RSA on Cloud Security
Alliance (Cloud Security Alliance,
2017) could be leveraged.

As these examples demonstrate, governments have a critical role to play to minimise unintended
consequences and ensure the 4IR is a responsible and sustainable revolution. History has shown
how government R&D investment programmes, coupled with access to government computing
power, have played an instrumental role in catalysing innovation and private markets to create
common goods, including big breakthroughs in space, pharmaceuticals, and technology. There
are several ways the public sector can also help in the 21st Century. Governments can identify
social, economic or environmental externalities that the market does not capture, and come up
with regulatory or market mechanisms to address these market failures. Policy mechanisms can
be broadly categorised into market-based measures, regulation, and direct action. Below, as an
illustration, we use categories for policy mechanisms that could help achieve SDG 7
(Affordable and Clean Energy) and SDG 13 (Climate Action). These options, however, have
wider implications across many of the other SDGs due to the interconnected nature of the
Global Goals, see Table 2 below.
Table 2: Policy mechanisms description, generic and 4IR examples and indicative pros and cons
from a policy perspective
Policy
mechanism

Type of
intervention

Brief description

Generic
example

Pros from a policy
perspective

Cons from a
policy
perspective

Example 4IR
application

Market-based
measures

Fiscal
instruments
(taxes and
subsidies)

To disincentivise (or
incentivise)
activity in
certain areas or
sectors through
fiscal
instruments

Carbon or
landfill taxes;
subsidies for
renewable
energy.

-Price (tax or subsidy)
level is generally
known in advance.
-Relatively
straightforward to
design and administer.
-Encourages innovation
by firms or individuals
in order to avoid the
tax.
-Raises revenue that
can be spent on
pollution mitigation.
-Efficient from a
market perspective as it
internalises the external
cost of pollution.

-Quantity of
reduction (or
increase in
activity) is not
known so tax
take or total
subsidies are
uncertain.
-Can be
difficult to
accurately price
the external
cost (and
therefore set the
accurate tax
level).
-May
encourage
flight of
companies to
other countries
or jurisdictions.

Subsidies for
‘tech for good’
applications.
Taxes on
‘damaging’ or
harmful
emerging tech
applications.

Market-based
measures

Cap and
trade
(emissions
trading
systems)

To lower, and
limit, the
volume of
emissions or
pollutants by
capping
emissions.
Permits are then
used for market
participants to
trade emissions
permits.

Emissions
Trading
Systems; US
Acid Rain
Programme.

-Level of activity (or
reduction) is set (or
capped) and will be
met over a given
timeframe.
-Encourages innovation
by firms or individuals
in order to financially
benefit from the
system.
-If permits are
auctioned, raises
revenue that can be
spent on pollution
mitigation.
-Efficient from a
market perspective as it
internalizes the external
cost of pollution.

- Price of that
quantity of
activity level is
not known in
advance and
could turn out
to be
expensive.
- Can be
difficult to
determine the
appropriate
number of
permits.
Administrative
costs associated
with
implementation
can be high.

Blockchain,
and IoT,
enabled cap
and trade
systems.

Market-based
measures

Voluntary
agreements

Facilitated by
governments or
regulators for
certain sectors
or areas, which
can be looser but
sometimes offer
effective lowcost changes
where industry
is ready and
willing to
cooperate.

Sector
agreements to
reach 100%
renewables
electricity
generation.

Minimal burden of
administration/reportin
g upon government.
Often is perceived as a
more collaborative
solution working with
the companies who will
affect change.
Showing commitment
to voluntary
agreements can
facilitate healthy
competition between
organisations to appear
environmentally
conscious.

Companies
may not
cooperate, or
set too lax a
target that is
within
“business as
usual” reach.
Challenges
related to
accountability
if organisations
are not obliged
to report
against
performance.

Voluntary
agreements as
regards AI
standards and
defining what
‘harmful AI’
is and how it
should be
monitored.

Regulation

Standards

To limit or
specify levels of
emissions,
pollutants,
efficiency, or
energy use.
Public
procurement can
also include
standards on
supply chains
for firms or
products to
meet.

Car emissions
or exhaust
standards. And
procurement
environment
and / or social
requirements..

Standards can create an
industry-wide target for
manufacturers to meet.
They also create a level
playing field within
markets.
Dates for introduction
can be agreed with
organisations well in
advance to give them
time to prepare - this
can also shape research
and development
trends.

Industry
lobbying can
ensure
improvements
in standards
remain
incremental in
nature and do
not achieve the
step-change in
activity
required
In the context
of newly
produced
products, does
not address
impact of
existing
products (e.g.
existing cars on
the road).

Standards, and
potentially
limits, around
how emerging
technologies
are designed
and used.
Standards on
energy
use/efficiency
for emerging
technology.

Regulation

Mandatory
phase-out

Instruments or
laws to ban
certain activities
or products over
time.

The
incandescent
light bulb in
the European
Union.

Can drive change more
quickly and provides an
end-date for use.

Cost of change
can be high if
not effectively
planned and
monitored.

Mandatory
phase-out of
nonautonomous
electric
vehicles in
city centres by
the 2040s.

Direct action

Public
research

Using
government
research funding
and institutes to
initiate or
accelerate
solutions.

AI applications
in climate
modelling and
weather
prediction,
advanced
material
science for
clean energy
sources and
storage, carbon
sequestering
techniques etc.

Provides early stage
research-led approach
to solution ideation,
which can then be
scaled.
Upskills a potential
workforce in the areas
chosen.

Public
institutes,
although often
effective, might
not always be
the best place
to innovate
solutions.
Can be difficult
to translate
research into
practical
solutions for
implementation
.

Research into
‘tech for good’
applications
with a focus
on individual
and 4IR
technologies
in
combination.

Direct action

Retraining
and skills

To manage the
flow of
resources from
contracting
sectors to fastgrowing sectors.

Initiatives
might include
retraining,
skills
development,
and provision
of transitional
support
facilities.

Helps achieve buy-in to
structural change and
also ensures better
resource-use both
during and after a
transition.

Training needs
to be tailored to
where jobs are
likely to be
found. Poor
retraining and
reskilling can
exacerbate
resistance to
change.

Retraining oil
and gas or
mining
workers into
areas
including
advanced
materials clean
tech.
Reskilling
manufacturing
workers to use
3D-printing
and IIoT
systems.

Risk capital

Innovation
finance

To provide startup capital and/or
incubation
services to
accelerate
innovations
from R&D
through to
commercialisati
on

Competitive
innovation
(grant) funds,
start-up
accelerators
and incubators,
innovation
prizes

Tried and tested public
finance model, which
enables the best ideas
to emerge from
wherever they are.
Corrects market failure
where unproven tech
cannot attract finance

Does not
address systemwide barriers
and may risk
creating unlevel
playing field if
governments
‘pick winners’

Innovation
Fund or
Accelerator
for promising
new 4IR
enterprises at
start-up stage

Risk capital

Pricing
support
mechanisms

To provide
guaranteed
demand or
pricing for
products,
services or
assets which the
private sector
cannot forecast
with sufficient
certainty

Availabilitybased pricing
(infrastructure)
, offtakes,
power
purchase
agreements
and strike
prices,
guaranteed
market demand
(e.g. GAVI)

Provide certainty,
usually long-term,
enabling institutional
investors to invest at
scale and with patience

Relies on
government to
identify
solutions which
subsequent
market demand
may not justify

PPAs for 4IRenabled
distributed
renewable
energy grids
and market
places,
guaranteed
rental/purchas
e of future
tech assets or
products

Risk capital

Other
guarantees
and
insurances

To remove other
specific
uncertainties or
risks which are
too high for the
private sector to
be able to
absorb, which
prevent investm
ent

FX risk buydown, political
insurance,
third-party
default
guarantees

Reduce specific risks
which the private sector
cannot bear in a less
distortionary way than
direct finance.
Especially useful for
emerging, frontier or
volatile economies

Complex and
requiring
highly technical
financial
expertise;
uncertain
cashflow
impacts on
public finance
and difficult to
communicate

Default
insurance for
investors
looking to
provide loan
finance to
growth 4IR
enterprises
with social
and
environmental
impact

Risk capital

Patient and
concessiona
l capital

To provide
additional
capital
investment in
equity or debt
which the
market is not
providing,
sometimes at
below-market
rates of riskadjusted return

Concessional
loans, longterm tenor
loans, anchor
equity
investment

Provides a signalling
effect to private
investors, may also
enable commercial
models which would
otherwise not survive
on market terms but
have positive
environmental impact

Distortionary
by design, and
therefore need
smart use and
targeting at
high impact
areas. Require
investor skill
sets

Anchor
investment in
major, longterm assetbased 4IR
infrastructure;
equity
investment
into 4IR for
good
enterprises

Scaling 4IR innovations that tackle key social and environmental challenges
In addition to these broad mechanisms and levers, governments and policy makers can also take
a number of direct focused steps to support breakthrough innovations and promote
commercialisation. These include: targeted research and development (R&D) funding and tax
incentives; innovative public-private financial instruments including patient capital and risk
underwriting; technical advisory support; and facilitation of connections and partnerships
between entrepreneurs and large-scale commercial businesses with the knowhow to scale
innovations.
Figure 3 below outlines, in a simplified chronology, the range of public policy levers and
accompanying sources of private capital, which can help to accelerate innovations on a pathway
from ideation to scale. In parallel, institutional moves need to be sequenced across the
innovation cycle to maximise levers and finance options. For example, innovative start-ups can
struggle to gain finance from Venture Capital (VCs), who often prefer proven technologies with
track records on which to base investment decisions. There can, therefore, be a critical role for
angel investment, incubators, patient capital and government-backed innovation vehicles and
incentives.

Figure 3: Public policy and phases of innovation

Source: PwC

To realise the overarching opportunity of accelerating and scaling 4IR technologies - in a way
that provides innovative solutions that help to realise the SDGs - the full range of sources of
public and private capital will need to be drawn from. This will include, private, philanthropic,
corporate and public investment; and it may include both traditional commercial investment
seeking primarily financial returns, as well as innovative impact investments which seek a blend
of financial and (social and environmental) impact returns.
This scaling will require a range of solutions and applications, both standalone and in
combination, across most - if not all - sectors to achieve transformative goals. Some examples
and emerging applications include:
For Energy, one of the key 4IR innovation challenges is for technology breakthroughs to enable
a next-generation clean distributed grid with virtual power plants aggregating millions and soon
billions of emerging renewables sources, all optimised by AI and machine learning, with
blockchain and IoT enabled peer-to-peer trading.
In Transport, advanced materials including graphene and nano-solutions are close to
underpinning battery breakthroughs for inexpensive, quick-charging energy-dense batteries.

12

Economics Discussion Paper (2018–32)—submitted to Global Solutions Papers

This could disrupt the market for carbon-intensive internal combustion engines and make
electric cars both performance- and cost- competitive.
In Manufacturing, circular global supply chains could be more quickly realised utilising the
“Industrial Internet of Things” (IIoT) coupled with AI, robotics, virtual reality, drones and
advanced materials.
In Retail, technology could fundamentally transform resource-heavy consumption, developing
from a new system of virtual shopping, point-of-use 3D printing, blockchain, AI and IoTenabled supply chain transparency and accountability, and circular and sharing economy
models.
In Finance, Fintech, including AI, blockchain and IoT, enable increased access and
decentralisation of the financial system to serve the unbanked and underbanked, improve market
integrity and could perhaps provide early warning signals of systemic financial strains.
In cities, the IoT and bioengineering can be utilised to alter space and integrate operational
systems to make lighting, heating, deliveries and waste collection more efficient based on realtime demand. Elsewhere, Blockchain and AI technologies can help automate planning processes
and property developments. Moreover, drones, 3D-printing and robots can be used to construct
new multifunctional buildings in a more timely and resource-efficient manner. See our 4IR
report on Sustainable Emerging Cities. 2
These examples are only a few illustrations of the transformations to traditional sectors enabled
by 4IR technologies that can also lead to positive social and environmental impact. In many
cases emerging solutions, across sectors, are realised by fusing together a number of 4IR
technologies - with AI and data, IoT and blockchain in particular often coming together as a
“4IR gearbox” for change. The potential is there for 4IR technologies to come together to drive
broader structural changes in our cities, across our transport and energy networks, to our
financial markets, and through our industrial value chains. This is why it is important that
innovation initiatives go beyond investment into a single technology or specialisation, but also
create opportunities for connection and collaboration to unlock game-changing outcomes.
To illustrate this further, in the recent PwC Innovation for the Earth Report, 3 we identified five
key 4IR innovation game-changers for two of the SDGs 7 and 13 (Affordable and Clean
Energy, and Climate Action) which fuse together 4IR technologies and present substantial
potential to underpin a zero-net-emissions economy (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Five emerging game-changing climate solutions building on multiple 4IR technologies

Source: PwC (2017b)

Recommendations for the G20
Bringing this together, below we set out some initial steps to consider. These recommendations
would involve the G20, together with international organisations, collaborating with multiple
stakeholders from politics, industry, academia and the civil society. G20 led, and supported,
collaboration, can help ensure that the 4IR supports global growth which is inclusive,
sustainable, and aligned to delivering the SDGs.
Overarching recommendations
1.

The G20 should champion international technological governance structures to
support 4IR-enabled solutions for the SDGs. This would provide the policy and
enabling environment to enable scaling of 4IR technologies that contribute towards
achieving the SDGs. Open architecture models ought to be explored to enable sharing
technological advances and data. Intellectual Property considerations will also need to
be addressed. Governance structures and policy safeguards will want to consider
international competitiveness, particularly to avoid a “race to the bottom” in terms of
tech firms’ jurisdiction for corporate, fiscal, and legal objectives. Building public trust
will also need to be a central principle of 4IR governance structures.

2.

The G20 should identify and promote essential safeguards to ensure a Sustainable
4IR to minimise unintended negative consequences (e.g. developing international
standards and regulations for blockchain, IoT devices, cloud data servers etc.). The
Global Blockchain Forum (The Chamber of Digital Commerce, 2017) – an international
body whose mission is to shape international blockchain policy – is a step in this regard.
Appropriate safeguards will also need to be developed to ensure security of data and
digital identities.

3.

The G20 should promote a coordinated effort by governments and regulators to
identify and manage systemic risks emanating from the 4IR. The focus would be the
effect on financial institutions in particular and financial stability more broadly. The
Bank of England and Financial Stability Board’s work on climate risk and financial
stability is an example on which to build (Bank of England, 2017). These efforts could
be broadened to include how tech investments and new business models are recognised
and are being accounted for, as well implications for tax policy and fiscal stability.
Regulators will also need to be modernised – working with RegTech innovators to
harness 4IR solutions for their own systems to provide adequate oversight and
supervision to sectors in the midst of rapid and structural transformation e.g. Fintech and
Energy.

4.

The G20 should encourage countries to develop responsible technology policies,
which would include developing a definition and standard as regards the ‘misuse of AI’
as well as employing social and environmental considerations in countries’ national
digital strategies. Governments should employ a joined-up approach to the 4IR within their country, including provision of interdepartmental oversight across government
functions to ensure technological social and environmental safeguards, and
opportunities, are managed in a holistic way. One specific lever could be for
governments to require their procurement supply chains to meet specific standards, or
safeguards, to tender for public sector contracts.
5.

The G20 should encourage 4IR technology experts to work with disciplines beyond
computer science and engineering to develop governance and policy solutions. Many
of the emerging technologies appearing could have enormous impacts on the ways we
live and work. There is a danger that solutions are designed and developed from a small
group of people with a limited perspective. There will increasingly need to be
significantly more interaction between technology practioners, domain experts, and a
broader range of disciplines including philosophy, law, psychology and policy etc. to
enable holistic mechanisms and solutions to be developed and deployed.

Research & Development and Education
6.

The G20 should make a call for G20 governments to commit large scale basic and
applied R&D investments towards priority Sustainable 4IR challenges. Coordinated
and targeted large scale fund commitments are required, encouraging research and
funding collaboration on ‘4IR for Good’ between industry, academic and government
research agencies. The efforts of Mission Innovation (Mission Innnovation, 2017) to set
ambitious targets and coordinate investment across over 20 countries for clean energy
solutions is one example.

7.

The G20 should steer basic research funding and priorities to encourage
interdisciplinary research that bridges technology, social and environmental
disciplines. Multi-disciplinary education and research programmes are vital to fuse
together technology, earth and social sciences. This would include integrating
sustainability and ethics into the curriculum of digital/technological/STEM-related
undergraduate and graduate courses, and integrating technology into earth and social
science curricula. MIT, for example, has taken on climate change as a ‘priority’,
involving thousands of students, a third of the faculty, and more than 40 start-ups. In
addition, Stanford University has developed a suite of 1-credit ‘Big Earth’ courses that
use big data analytics to examine or solve questions about the planet (Stanford
University, 2017). School children will also need to be fully engaged and trained for the
4IR.

8.

The G20 should promote national and international PPP initiatives, programmes and
funds to unlock and accelerate ‘4IR for Good’ innovation. This would include
innovative public-private partnership finance solutions to support early stage
commercialisation of 4IR for social and environmental impact solutions, including risk
finance (grants, concessional debt and equity), innovation prizes and challenge funds to promote ideation, and government backed incubators and accelerators to support
pioneering new companies and ventures to scale.
9.

The G20 should promote the establishment of a 4IR knowledge hub, a real-time
central knowledge hub (driven by 4IR technology) that would democratise critical 4IR
knowledge and data for business and society. The scope of this work could include, but
would not be limited to: sharing thinking and information on 4IR developments early in
the process; curating and consolidating standards in consumer markets across countries;
disseminating information about social and environmental impacts; a data-library,
including providing a central database of 4IR-related academic and other research work
and data. The hub could also usefully flag emerging risks and important policy
questions as technologies mature.

Engagement and awareness raising
10.

The G20 should openly and actively promote a global “tech for good” campaign to
educate people and industry about how technology can be a force for good. The
campaign could promote and disseminate, in conversation and collaboration with the
media and technology firms, information about how unintended consequences and
adverse effects are being mitigated, and how technologies are being developed and
deployed to realise social and environmental goals. Education can raise awareness, build
necessary 4IR skills in schools and universities, as well as alleviating the fear of the
unknown and the generation gap.

11.

The G20 should actively champion companies to support a Sustainable 4IR.
Governments, with industry input, should create policy and incentives that encourage
corporate policy and governance for responsible technology, including developing
business charters for responsible technology. The private sector also should be
encouraged to advance, build-in and optimise the impact of technologies on
sustainability in companies’ technology strategies. Entrepreneurs and designers need
increasingly to embed sustainability into design principles so that mainstream 4IR
technologies are in fact ‘smart’. Companies should be encouraged to collaborate, with
the UN (United Nations, 2017), across their industry, and with regulators, to aid
standard setting e.g. consensus protocols and targets.

Data, Algorithms and Ethics
12.

The G20 should support the creation of a better data environment - including access
and data skills - to maximise the opportunity of big data and machine learning for
sustainable 4IR solutions. As data is one of the key building blocks to drive innovation
in the 4IR, effort needs to be devoted to improving the systems by which we define,
gather, access and manipulate data. This includes government initiatives for open public
data, and policy frameworks (or agreements) to make strategic data available to specific

17

Economics Discussion Paper (2018–32)—submitted to Global Solutions Papers

users - with associated safeguards – for the purposes of big data and machine learning to
tackle societal and environmental challenges. It also requires investment in skills and
capability at every level, from establishing basic data literacy in schools, through to
fostering the uptake of sector-specific applications within industry and the cultivation of
world-leading big data and machine learning knowledge and capabilities within
universities.
13.

The G20 should develop a policy framework that supports tech companies, research
institutes and universities to manage potential systemic bias in algorithms. Crowdsourced raw data that tech companies use in their algorithms typically reflects the biases
and prejudices inherent in society at large. This has led to a series of instances where
algorithms have produced results that have been perceived as discriminatory (e.g. on
race or gender grounds). Policy frameworks are needed which balance concerns around
unfairness and discrimination in publicly-sourced big data with the technical and ethical
challenges as regards monitoring, and potential censoring, of data. The G20 should
support an initiative or commission for academics, technologists and other stakeholders
to determine a concrete process to hold algorithms and their owners accountable,
whether that's algorithmic transparency, oversight commissions or another form of
algorithmic accountability to ensure certain values are encoded and implemented in the
algorithmic models, from avoiding discrimination to optimising for minimal energy
usage. In addition to transparency, frameworks for explainabiliy and validity testing
ought to be developed.

14.

The G20 should consider and evaluate ethical aspects of the relationship between
people and machine systems, which would include implications for privacy, scope and
boundaries to human / digital augmentation and the rights of people. This should include
instituting policies and procedures that ensure that ethical aspects of cyber-physical
systems are identified, evaluated and appropriately addressed. Security of data and
digital identities will also need consideration.

15.

The G20 should recognise and support the work being done to give every person in
the world a unique digital identity. There is currently an initiative that directly
addresses the UN sustainability goal 16.9: "by 2030, provide legal identity for all,
including birth registration". ID2020 (ID2020, 2017), in partnership with the Gavi
foundation (Gavi, 2017) (an alliance who collectively vaccinate circa 93% of the
world’s population), aims to harness the 4IR to give a digital identity to everyone. This
initiative would secure recognition before the law and safeguard individual rights and
access to justice, public services, banking, visas etc.

18

Economics Discussion Paper (2018–32)—submitted to Global Solutions Papers
Introduction to xAI
Past is not prologue when it comes to artificial intelligence. Accelerating improvements in AI algorithms
are enabling breakthroughs of applications across domains, leading to ubiquitous systems that sense,
think, and act on their own. Technical advancements are resulting in more complex models that allow
computers to detect patterns in information but have limitations in human interpretability. Computers
have no sense of morality, so difficult to explain models can have hidden biases or issues that humans
cannot vet and have the potential to cause significant harm to society. For example, if a loan approval
system was used to automate the decisions about whether loans are approved or denied, a clear reason
must be given to customers whose applications are denied. In certain black box AI models used in the
past, demographic information influenced the system, resulting in bias-prone decisions. End users (in this
case, loan applicants) must be given rational explanations as to why a system decided in a certain
way. AI models often have stronger performance than traditional approaches, but have limited ability to
provide these much needed rational explanations.

This need for more interpretable AI has launched a field called "Explainable AI" or "xAI". xAI research
combines expertise from multiple disciplines (e.g. computer science, sociology, psychology, statistics,
etc.) and aims to find methods for AI systems to explain their decisions in a way that humans can easily
understand. xAI can be broken down into three main components:
•
•
•

Explainability: Each individual level result of a model needs to have reasoning on the
particular answer provided
Transparency: The inner workings of a model structure should be accessible to the user to
allow human understanding of the patterns detected by the AI
Provability: A model is provable when the user can test that an effective percentage of possible
predictions or decisions made by the model are correct

The xAI field is rapidly expanding, with agencies such as DARPA, Open AI, and the Future of Life
Institute heavily investing in xAI collaborations and xAI becoming an important part of many countrywide AI strategies. The effective development, use and dissemination of xAI needs to be a global effort to
mediate the appropriate use of AI.

Finally, we propose that the T20 considers establishing a dedicated taskforce on “Sustainable
4IR” to enable the T20 to provide expert input to G20 policymakers on this crucial cross-cutting
area for cooperation and policy-making. The taskforce would include recognised global experts
across emerging technologies, social and environmental challenges, and industry-specific
experts. It would recommend solutions and governance structures that are agile and flexible
enough to navigate and support rapid 4IR innovation - across the digital, physical and biological
domains of the 4IR - in a sustainable way. The taskforce would be linked to, and work closely
with, the Digital Economy taskforce and the 2030 Agenda Taskforce, but with a specific
mandate to steer the 4IR (incl. the digital economy) to meet the SDGs.