
1 Introduction
Mass production (MP) has been the established manufacturing paradigm for nearly a century. MP initially answered
to the need of the continuously increasing population around
the globe, with a gradual improvement in its living standards,
especially in the developed world, for goods and commodities. However, since the 1980s and with the beginning
of the new millennium, a saturation of the market towards
mass produced products is observed. In 2006, Chryssolouris
states that: ‘‘It is increasingly evident that the era of MP is
being replaced by the era of market niches. The key to creating products that can meet the demands of a diversiﬁed
customer base, is a short development cycle yielding low
cost and high quality goods in sufﬁcient quantity to meet
demand’’ [1]. Currently, the need for increased product
variety is intensifying, and customers in many market segments request truly unique products, tailored to their individual taste. Companies are striving to offer product variety
while trying to produce more with less [2] (i.e. maximise
their output while minimising the use of materials and
environmental footprint), while the landscape that they must
operate in, inﬂicted by the economic recession, has become
more complex and dynamic than ever.
In the mass customisation (MC) paradigm, the establishment of which is still an ongoing process, instead of
treating customers merely as product buyers, a producer
must consider them as integrated entities in the product
design and development cycle. In this customer-driven
environment that is shifting towards online purchases and
market globalisation, the underlying manufacturing systems
and chains are heavily affected. Owing to its multidisciplinary nature, the manufacturing domain in general lacks of
uniﬁed solution approaches [3]. The management of the coevolution of product, process and production on a strategic


planning, and control life cycle perspectives within the
general MC landscape, targeting to the understanding of
the current situation and identiﬁcation of future developments. For the scope of the paper, areas of supplier
selection, initial manufacturing network design, supply
chain coordination, complexity, logistics management,
inventory and capacity planning and management, lot sizing, enterprise resource planning (ERP), customer relationship management (CRM), and supply chain control are
reviewed. The purpose is to establish an overview of the
current status of academic research and pinpoint the challenges that have yet to be addressed by academic work.
Departing from that, major drivers and enabling technologies are identiﬁed, as well as concepts that can lead to
a more sustainable implementation of MC are proposed.
The review is based on structured search in academic
journals and books, which were retrieved primarily from
Scopus and Google Scholar databases, using as keywords
the main ﬁelds of interest of the study, namely: evolution
of manufacturing paradigms, issues in MC and personalisation environments, the role of simulation for manufacturing, methods and technologies related to product and
production complexity, and inventory management and
capacity planning, among others. Academic peer-reviewed
publications related to the above ﬁelds were selected,
ranging over a period of 30 years, from 1984 to 2015, with
only a few notable exceptions. Sciences that were considered in the search were: engineering, management, business, and mathematics. The review was carried out in three
stages: (1) search in scientiﬁc databases with relevant
keywords, (2) identiﬁcation of the relevant papers after
reading their abstract, and (3) full-text reading and
grouping into research topics. Indicatively, the frequency
of results from a search with the keywords ‘‘mass customisation’’ or ‘‘product personalisation’’ in the abstract,
title, and keywords of the article as obtained by the Scopus
database is depicted in Fig. 1.
Frequency of "mass customisaƟon" and
"personalisaƟon" keywords per year (Scopus)

Frequency of appearance

and operational level is a huge challenge. Market globalisation broadens the target audience of a product, while at the
same time it constitutes supply strategies and logistics’ more
difﬁcult to manage. Adding to that, the Internet, one of the
primary enablers of globalisation, allowed online customisation and purchasing, leading to new disruptive purchasing
models. In their turn, these models affected long-established
businesses that could not form an online presence fast and
succumbed to the competition. Moreover, the economic
recession highlighted the need for quick adaptation to
demand; companies that could not adapt to the new
requirements suffered economic losses and their viability
was challenged. Simultaneously, the decreasing product
costs and the increase in purchasing power in developing
countries generated new markets and destabilised demand.
Finally, the emergence of new materials, new forms of
production, and key enabling technologies constitute new
diversiﬁed product features and processes feasible, as well
as they allow the interconnection between ICT systems,
humans, and engineering/manufacturing phases.
It becomes apparent that manufacturers and service providers are presented with numerous external and internal
drivers and challenges [4] that have a visible impact on the
smooth operation of the entire value-adding network down to
each individual manufacturing facility [5]. A root cause for
these problems is that while the MC paradigm proposes a set
of practices and solutions for tackling these issues, its practical implementation is still considered as work in progress in
terms of effectiveness of coordination and collaboration
between stakeholders, design and planning of networks and
facilities, and execution and control efﬁciency [6]. An
enabling solution for realising a cost-effective implementation
of MC is to properly conﬁgure easily adaptable manufacturing networks, which are capable to handle the complexity and
disturbances that modern production requirements inﬂict [7].
Support systems for the design, planning, and control with
inherent robustness are necessary in order for companies to
withstand the antagonism through sustainable practices.
Technology-based business approaches comprise a major
enabler for the realisation of robust manufacturing systems
and networks that offer high value-added, user-oriented
products and services. These qualities are critical for companies in order to master variety and maintain their viability
[8]. Signiﬁcant work has been conducted on this ﬁeld, yet a
focused review of the literature regarding the inﬂuence of MC
practices on different aspects of the manufacturing network
life cycle is missing. In particular, the lack of dedicated
reviews on the challenging issues of design, planning, and
operation of manufacturing networks in the framework of MC
forms the motivation for conducting this work [9].
Towards bridging this gap in academic approaches, this
work reviews the existing literature related to the basic
aspects of a manufacturing network from its design,

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:2

450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1985

1995

2005

2015

Year

Fig. 1 Frequency of appearance of the keywords ‘‘mass customisation’’ and ‘‘personalisation’’ in the abstract, title, and keywords of the
on these topics by the scientiﬁc community, and the
establishment of MC as a distinct ﬁeld of research. The
trend resembles a typical hype cycle. In the beginning, the
abstract concept of MC is born from the realisation that
product variety is increasing. Then, key enabling technologies, such as the rise of the Internet, web-based collaboration means, and ﬂexible manufacturing systems act
as a trigger in the spread of MC, quickly reaching a peak
during late 1990s and early 2000s. Until then, most studies
are concerned with management and strategic issues of
MC, failing to address critical MC implementation issues.
Afterwards, researchers realised that a series of sub-problems ought to be tackled ﬁrst, leading to research indirectly
associated with MC (e.g. investigation of product family
modelling techniques). Nevertheless, MC is here to stay,
therefore, research interest on complete MC solutions starts
appearing after 2005 and continues up to the current date.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the evolution of manufacturing paradigms and
discusses the recent shift towards customer-centred manufacturing. Section 3 performs a literature review on major
topics related to the life cycle of manufacturing networks,
together with the latest advances in ICT for supporting the
design, planning, and control of manufacturing networks.
Section 4 summarises the challenges that need to be
addressed, aided by a generic view of the manufacturing
landscape of the near future. Finally, Sect. 5 concludes the
paper.

2 Evolution of manufacturing and current
challenges
2.1 Evolution of manufacturing paradigms
Over time, manufacturing paradigms, driven by the pressure of the environment in which they operate, change in
character and evolve in patterns (Fig. 2). The various patterns witnessed up to now can be roughly correlated to
movements between three stages: (1) craft shops that
employ skilled artisans, (2) long-linked industrial systems
using rigid automation, and (3) post-industrial enterprises
characterised by ﬂexible resources and information intensive intellectual work [10]. Prevailing manufacturing
paradigms are, in chronological order of appearance, the
following: craft production, American production, mass
production, lean production, mass customisation, and global manufacturing. Apart from American production, all
other paradigms are still ‘‘operational’’ today in different
industrial sectors [11].
By studying these notable transitions, which are attributed to the pressure applied by social needs, political

Page 3 of 20 2

factors, and advances in technology, it is noticeable that
factory systems and technologies have been evolving in
two directions. Firstly, they increased the versatility of the
allowable products’ variety that they produced. This
resulted in numerous production innovations, design technology advances, and evolution in management techniques.
Secondly, companies have extended factories like tools and
techniques. Factories emerged from ﬁrms that introduced a
series of product and process innovations that made possible the efﬁcient replication of a limited number of designs
in massive quantities. This tactic is widely known as
economies of scale [12]. Factory systems replaced craft
modes of production as ﬁrms learned how to rationalise
and product designs as well as standardise production itself
[13]. Although factory organisations provided higher
worker and capital productivity, their structure made it
difﬁcult to introduce new products or processes quickly and
economically, or to meet the demands of customers with
distinctive tastes; factory-oriented design and production
systems have never completely replaced craftsmanship or
job shops even if the new technologies continue to appear.
The result, in economic, manufacturing, and design concepts, has been a shift from simple economies of scale, as
in the conventional MP of a limited number of products, to
economies of scope and customer integration [14]. It is
clear that MP factories or their analogues are not appropriate for all types of products or competitive strategies.
Moreover, they have traditionally worked best for limited
numbers of variants suited to mass replication and mass
consumption. The craft approach offers a less efﬁcient
process, at least for commodity products, but remains
necessary for technologies that are still new or emerging
and continues to serve speciﬁc market niches, such as for
tailoring products for individual needs and luxury or traditional items. A categorisation of the different production
concepts based on the indicators system reconﬁgurability,
demand volatility, and product complexity is depicted in
Fig. 3.
Today, issues introduced by the shift of business models
towards online purchasing and customisation [15] must be
tackled in cost-efﬁcient and sustainable ways in order for
companies to maintain their competitiveness and create
value [16]. To respond to consumer demand for higher
product variety, manufacturers started to offer increased
numbers of product ‘‘options’’ or variants of their standard
product [17]. Therefore, practice nowadays focuses on
strategies and methods for managing product, process, and
production systems development that are capable of supporting product variety, adaptability, and leanness, built
upon the paradigms of MC and product personalisation.
The currently widespread MC is deﬁned as a paradigm for
‘‘developing, producing, marketing and delivering affordable goods, and services with enough variety and

systems using rigid
automation
Industrial RevoluƟon England

Craft shops
that employ
skilled
artisans

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:2

1800

1700

1850

nd

1300

800

700

1955 – Peak of Mass
ProducƟon

1913

1900
CraŌ
ProducƟon

600

American
ProducƟon

Mass ProducƟon

Start of 2
Industrial
RevoluƟon
ScienƟﬁc
Management
System (Taylorism)

Sociotechnical
System

Fordism

Post-industrial
information
intensive
enterprises with
p
flexible resources

1990
Global Manufacturing
Networks

Lean ProducƟon/Manufacturing
1980
Total
PrevenƟve
Maintenance

JIT

Personalised
ProducƟon

Networks
Mass CustomizaƟon

Virtual
MC

ProducƟon
Networks

Strategic
Network

Regionalised
ProducƟon
2000+

Decentralised
Mini Factories

Cluster
Concept

Fig. 2 Evolution of manufacturing paradigms (adapted from [11])

customisation that nearly everyone ﬁnds exactly what they
want’’ [17]. This is achieved mostly through modularised
product/service design, ﬂexible processes, and integration
between supply chain members [18, 19]. MC targets
economies of scope through market segmentation, by
designing variants according to a product family architecture and allowing customers to choose between design
combinations [20]. At the same time, however, MC must
achieve economies of scale, in a degree compared to that of
MP, due to the fact that it addresses a mass market.
Another signiﬁcant objective for companies operating in an
MC landscape is the achievement of economies of customer integration in order to produce designs that the
customers really want [14]. On the other hand, personalised
production aims to please individual customer needs
through the direct integration of the customer in the design

123

of products. The major differences between the prominent
paradigms of MP, MC, and personalisation in terms of
goals, customer involvement, production system, and product structure are depicted in Fig. 4.
A research conducted in the UK related to automotive
products revealed that 61 % of the customers wanted their
vehicle to be delivered within 14 days [21], whereas consumers from North America responded that they could wait
no longer than 3 weeks for their car, even if it is custom
built [22]. Such studies point out the importance of
responsiveness and pro-activeness for manufacturers in
product and production design.
During the last 15 years, the number of online purchases
has increased and recent surveys show that 89 % of the
buyers prefer shopping online to in-store shopping [23].
Complexity
A: Personalized ProducƟon
B: Mass CustomizaƟon
C: Mass ProducƟon
D: Lean Manufacturing
E: CraŌ ProducƟon

Page 5 of 20 2

E

A
High System
Flexibility /
Reconﬁgurability

B
D

Stable/
Forecastle
Demand

C

VolaƟle /
Unpredictable
demand

Low System
Flexibility

Low Product
Complexity

Fig. 3 Characterisation of production paradigms based on demand
structure, product complexity, and product ﬂexibility

Mass producƟon

Customer
involvement
ProducƟon
System

PersonalizaƟon

Economy of
Scale
Buy

Choose

Design

Dedicated
Manufacturing
System (DMS)

Reconﬁgurable
Manufacturing
System (RMS)

On Demand
Manufacturing
System

Common
parts

Goal

Mass
customizaƟon
Economy of
scope

Common Custom
parts
parts

Common Custom
parts
parts

Value
diﬀerenƟaƟon

Product
Structure

Personalized
Parts

Fig. 4 Differences between production paradigms (adapted from
[20])

implemented and have proved to be very effective in capturing the pulse of the market [24]. These web-based toolkits
aim at providing a set of user-friendly design tools that allow
trial-and-error experimentation processes and deliver
immediate simulated feedback on the outcome of design
ideas. Once a satisfactory design is found, the product
speciﬁcations can be transferred into the ﬁrm’s production
system and the custom product is subsequently produced
and delivered to the customer [25]. Still online 2D and 3D
conﬁgurators do not solve practical issues such as the
assembly process of these unique variants. Although proposed approaches include e-assembly systems for collaborative assembly representation [26] and web-based
collaboration systems [27], the research in this area needs to
be expanded in order to provide tools for assembly representation and product variant customisation. An additional
constraint is that globalised design and manufacturing often

require the variants for local markets to be generated by
regional design teams, which use different assembly software and source parts from different supply bases [20]. The
incorporation of the customers’ unique tastes in the product
design phase is a fairly new approach to the established
ways of achieving product variety and entails signiﬁcant
reorganisation, reconﬁguration, and adaptation efforts for
the company’s production system. Variety is normally realised at different stages of a product life cycle. It can be
realised during design, assembly, at the stage of sales and
distribution, and through adjustments at the usage phase.
Moreover, variety can be realised during the fabrication
process, e.g. through rapid prototyping [28].
It should ﬁnally be noted that naturally, even if the
trends dictate a shift towards personalised product
requirements, it should always be considered that forms of
production such as MP cannot be abandoned for commodities and general-purpose products, raw materials, and
equipment. After all, paradigms are shaped to serve
speciﬁc market and economical situations.
2.2 Globalisation
Globalisation in manufacturing activities, apart from its
apparent advantages, introduces a set of challenges. On the
one hand, a globalised market offers opportunities for
expanding the sphere of inﬂuence of a company, by widening
its customer base and production capacity. Information and
communication technologies (ICT) and the Internet have
played a signiﬁcant role to that [29]. On the other hand,
regional particularities greatly complicate the transportation
logistics and the identiﬁcation of optimum product volume
procurement, among other. Indicatively, the difﬁculty in
forecasting product demand was highlighted as early as in
1986 by the following observation from Intel laboratories:
when investigating the match between actual call off and the
actual forecast, they estimated that supply and demand were in
equilibrium for only 35 min in the period between 1976 and
1986 [30, 31]. Enterprises started locating their main production facilities in countries with favourable legislation and
low cost of human labour [32]; thus, the management of the
supply chain became extremely complex, owing primarily to
the fact that a great number of business partners have to
mutually cooperate in order to carry out a project, while being
driven by opportunistic behaviours. Thus, manufacturing
networks need to properly coordinate, collaborate, and communicate in order to survive [33].
On a manufacturing facility level, the impact of supply
chain uncertainties and market ﬂuctuations is also considerable. The design and engineering analysis of a complex
manufacturing system is a devious task, and the operation
of the systems becomes even harder when ﬂexibility and
reconﬁgurability parameters must be incorporated [34].


The process is iterative and can be separated into smaller
tasks of manageable complexity. Resource requirements,
resource layout, material ﬂow, and capacity planning are
some of these tasks [1], which even after decomposition
and relaxation remain challenging [35]. In particular, in the
context of production for MC businesses, issues such as
task-sequence-dependent inter-task times between product
families are usually ignored, leading to inexact, and in
many cases non-feasible, planning and scheduling. Even
rebalancing strategies for serial lines with no other interdependencies is challenging, leaving ample room for
improvement in order for the inconsistencies between
process planning and line balancing to be minimised [20].
From a technological perspective, the increased penetration of ICT in all aspects of product and production life
cycles enables a ubiquitous environment for the acquisition,
processing, and distribution of information, which is especially beneﬁcial for a globalised paradigm. With the introduction of concepts like cyber physical systems (CPS) and
Internet of things (IoT) in manufacturing [36], new horizons
are presented for improving awareness, diagnosis, prognosis,
and control. Also, the relatively new paradigm of agentbased computation provides great potential for realising
desirable characteristics in production, such as autonomy,
responsiveness, distributiveness, and openness [37].

3 Manufacturing networks life cycle and mass
customisation
In this section, the recent advances and the challenges
presented during the life cycle of a manufacturing network
are discussed. A typical modern manufacturing network is
Fig. 5 Manufacturing network
life cycle

composed of cooperating original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) plants, suppliers, distribution centres, and dealers
that produce and deliver ﬁnal products to the market [38].
The topics discussed include supplier selection, supply
chain coordination, initial network conﬁguration, manufacturing network complexity, inventory management,
capacity planning, warehousing, lot sizing, ICT support
tools, and dynamic process planning, monitoring, and
control. These topics are in line with the life cycle phases
of a manufacturing network as reported in [39] (Fig. 5).
3.1 Supplier selection
The building blocks of any manufacturing network are the
cooperating companies. The signiﬁcance of the selection of
these stakeholders (supplier, vendors) has been indicated as
early as in 1966 as stressed in [40] and is known as the
supplier selection problem. This decision-making problem
is highly challenging since it goes beyond simple comparison of component prices from different suppliers. It is
often decomposed into sub-problems of manageable complexity, such as formulation of criteria for the selection,
qualiﬁcation of partners, ﬁnal selection, and feedback
veriﬁcation. A comprehensive literature review on the issue
of supplier selection in agile manufacturing chains is
included in [41]. In Fig. 6, the decomposition of the supplier selection problem into small more manageable
problems is presented, together with indicative methods for
solving these sub-problems.
The supplier selection problem becomes even more
complicated in the era of MC since a certain level of
adaptability and robustness is necessary when operating
within a volatile and rapidly changing environment. The

1. CreaƟon
IdenƟﬁcaƟon and selecƟon of
partners, requirements and scope
Supplier
SelecƟon

Customer
Requirements
Management

Enterprise
Resource
Management

2. ConﬁguraƟon
OperaƟonal rules; deﬁne and
implement IT infrastructure,
Enterprise
Resource
Management

Manufacturing
Network
Life-cycle
Any other
necessary
funcƟon for the
reconﬁguraƟon
reasons/needs

123

Capacity
Planning
Supply Chain
Control

LogisƟcs
Management

Customer
Requirements
Management

Inventory
Management

Complexity
Management

Enterprise
Resource
Management

4. (Re)conﬁguraƟon
(Re)organizaƟon of the network
layout with the come in and come
out of members

IniƟal
ConﬁguraƟon

Supply chain
CoordinaƟon

3. OperaƟon
ExecuƟon and coordinaƟon of
small more manageable
problems, and indicative
methods for solving them
(adapted from [51])

Page 7 of 20 2

Data
Simple MulƟ
MathemaƟcal
Envelopment
AƩribute
Programming
Analysis
RaƟng

Criteria for the
selecƟon
QualiﬁcaƟon of
partners

GeneƟc
Algorithms

Feedback
veriﬁcaƟon
Decision-making
problem

AnalyƟcal
Hierarchy
Process

Case Based
Reasoning

Final selecƟon

Supplier
SelecƟon

AnalyƟc
Network
Process

Fuzzy Set
Theory

Integrated &
Hybrid
Approaches

DecomposiƟon into subproblems of manageable
complexity

most commonly used criteria in supplier selection studies
include quality and performance [42]. However, when
having to deal with unpredictability and ﬂuctuating
demand, which are common in MC, additional factors need
to be considered such as management compatibility,
transparency of operations, strategic direction, reliability,
and agility [43]. While trying to adhere to eco-friendliness
directives, frameworks like the one proposed in [44]
incorporate environmental footprint criteria to green supply
chain design. Moreover, several other criteria may be relevant according to the design and planning objectives of a
niche supply chain, which could be identiﬁed using data
mining methods [45].
The Internet and web-based platforms are used in recent
years in order to counterbalance uncertainty, monitor
altering parameters (e.g. weather in supply routes), and
proactively adapt to changes [46]. Moreover, several proposed supplier selection models incorporate the relative
importance of the supplier selection factors depending on
the types of targeted MC implementation, e.g. for the
component-sharing modularity type of MC, the requirements for selecting suppliers would not be the same as the
component-sweeping modularity implementation type
[47]. Like in the case of a stable low variety production, the
analytic hierarchy process (AHP) is commonly used as a
means to solve the multi-criteria decision-making problem
of supplier selection. Incorporating uncertain information
about the real world, essentially extending the Dempster–
Shafer theory, the authors in [48] propose the D-AHP
method for solving the supplier selection problem. The
suggested D numbers preference relation encapsulates the
advantages of fuzziness and handles possible incomplete
and imprecise information, which is common in humandriven systems such as supply chains. Similarly, a combined analytic hierarchy process—quality function
deployment (AHP–QFD) framework is described by [49]
that handles uncertain information, selects suppliers, and
allocates orders to them. A multi-criteria decision-making
method to support the identiﬁcation of business-to-business

Commonly uƟlised
methods for solving
sub-problems

(B2B) collaboration schemes, especially for supplier
selection is proposed in [50].
3.2 Supply chain coordination
The literature on organisational knowledge creation points
out that ‘‘coordination’’ plays an important role in combining knowledge from stakeholders [52], while it also
mediates the relationship between product modularity and
MC [53]. A report on coordination mechanisms for supply
chains was compiled in [54].
Concerning coordination in supply chains, in general,
two topologies are studied, namely the centralised and the
decentralised one [11] (Fig. 7). In the ﬁrst, the coordination
decisions are taken by a central body, often the leading
supply chain OEM, whereas in the second, each member
independently makes its own operational decisions. The
decentralised topology has been proven to improve the
performance in the context of MC [38, 55]. A supply chain
that is commissioned to provide a variety of customised
products requires a total systems approach to managing the

Supply Chain
Management

Oo

O2
O1

Ss

D3

S4

OEM
faciliƟes / plants
S3

S1

D7
Dd

Suppliers

S2

(Tier 1, 2,…n)
D9

C1
Cc

C6

D4
D8

D2
C3

Decentralised Topology

Dealers
Customers

D1
C4

D5

C2
C5

Centralised Topology

Fig. 7 Centralised and decentralised supply chain topologies. In a
centralised topology, material and information move only downstream. In the decentralised one, material/information can be
transferred both upstream and downstream to better serve customisation, personalisation, and/or regionalisation [6]


entire ﬂow of information, materials, and services in fulﬁlling customer demand [56]. Further incentives have to be
provided to the members, so as to entice their cooperation
through the distribution of the beneﬁts of the coordination
for instance.
The need for adaptation to the new MC requirements has
led to the deﬁnition of a novel framework for autonomous
logistics processes. The concept of autonomous control
‘‘describes processes of decentralised decision-making in
heterarchical structures, and it presumes interacting elements in non-deterministic systems, and possess the capability and possibility to render decisions independently
[57]’’. However, regardless the topology, the alignment of
the objectives of the different collaborating organisations
in order to successfully carry out projects, optimise system
performance, and achieve mutual proﬁts is indispensable
[58]. While an action plan sufﬁces for the coordination of a
centralised supply chain, it is inadequate with a decentralised one [59] since entities tend to exhibit opportunistic
behaviour. Nevertheless, in terms of overall network performance, decentralised topologies have shown great beneﬁts for serving the mass customisation paradigm [6, 7].
3.3 Initial manufacturing network conﬁguration
The initial manufacturing network conﬁguration must
consider the long-term needs of cooperation and often
determines its success. In a constantly changing environment, the conﬁguration of the manufacturing network must
be, therefore, ﬂexible and adaptable to external forces. The
problem has been extensively addressed in the literature
using approaches classiﬁed in two main categories, namely
approximation (artiﬁcial intelligence, evolutionary computation, genetic algorithms, tabu search, ant colony optimisation, simulated annealing, heuristics, etc.) and
optimisation techniques (enumerative methods, Lagrangian
relaxation, linear/nonlinear integer programming, decomposition methods, etc.) and their hybrids [60, 61] (Fig. 8).

Scope of network

Focusing on agile supply chains, a hybrid analytic network
process mixed-integer programming model is proposed in
[62] with uttermost aim the fast reaction to customer
demands. Fuzzy mathematical programming techniques
have been employed to address the planning problems for
multi-period, multi-product supply chains [63]. A coloured
Petri Nets approach for providing modelling support to the
supply chain conﬁguration issue is included in [64]. A
dynamic optimisation mathematical model for multi-objective decision-making for manufacturing networks that
operated in a MC environment is suggested in [65].
Still, the accuracy of planning ahead in longer horizons
is restricted. The incorporation of unpredictable parameters
in the conﬁguration through a projection of the possible
setting of the network in the future may lead to unsafe
results.
3.4 Inventory management/capacity planning/lot
sizing
Inventories are used by most companies as a buffer
between supply chain stages to handle uncertainty and
volatile demand. Prior to the 1990s, where the main supply
chain phases, namely procurement, production, and distribution, were regarded in isolation, companies maintained
buffers of large inventories due to the lack of regulatory
mechanisms and feedback [66]. The basis for manufacturing and inventory planning was relatively safe forecasts.
However, in the era of customisation the basis is actual
orders and the pursuit is minimisation of inventories. These
requirements constitute inventory management and
capacity planning functions very important for a profitable MC implementation.
In complex distributed systems such as modern manufacturing companies with a global presence, the question of
optimal dimensioning and positioning of inventory emerges as a challenging research question. Various strategies
for inventory planning have been reported based on how
GeneƟc
Algorithms
Tabu Search
Simulated
Annealing

Flexibility /
adaptability

DecomposiƟon
Methods

External Forces,

IniƟal Manufacturing
Network
ConﬁguraƟon

Life duraƟon
Partners
Long-term
projecƟons

Linear / nonlinear integer
programming

Issues to be considered
simultaneously

ArƟﬁcial
Intelligence
Ant Colony
OpƟmisaƟon
HeurisƟcs
Lagrangian
relaxaƟon
EnumeraƟve
Methods
…

IndicaƟve methods used

Fig. 8 Issues to be considered during the initial manufacturing network conﬁguration and indicative methods used

123

EvoluƟonary
ComputaƟon
Simulated
Annealing

Fig. 9 Methods (indicative)
used for solving the capacitated
lot sizing problem (adapted
from [70])

Branch and
Bound

Valid
inequaliƟes

Rounding
HeurisƟcs

Time-based
Item-based
Item-based
DecomposiƟon DecomposiƟon AggregaƟon
Capacitated Lot
Sizing Problem

MetaheurisƟcs

…
…

Local Search
Variable
GeneƟcs, Tabu …
HeurisƟcs Neighbourhood Search, etc.
Lagrangian
RelaxaƟon

Lagrangian
HeurisƟcs

Lagrangian
…
DecomposiƟon

ConstrucƟve Greedy search Improvement
HeurisƟcs
HeurisƟcs
Greedy

…

IndicaƟve methods used

the underlying demand and return processes are modelled
over time, thus making a distinction between constant,
continuous time-varying, and discrete time-varying
demand and return models [67]. Integrated capacity planning methods encompassing stochastic dynamic optimisation models over volatile planning horizons exhibit high
performance in the context of MC and personalisation [68].
The DEWIP (decentralised WIP) control mechanism was
proposed in [69], focusing on establishing control loops
between work centres for adjusting the WIP levels
dynamically. Its performance was assessed against other
well-accepted systems such as LOOR, Conwip, and Polca.
Methods used for solving the capacitated lot sizing problem are indicatively shown in Fig. 9.
In particular, in just-in-time (JIT) environments, MC
impacts the amount of inventory that needs to be carried by
ﬁrms that supply many part variants to a JIT assembly line.
In addition, the supply of parts is performed either on
constant order cycles or more commonly under non-constant cycles [71]. The goal chasing heuristic, pioneered
within the Toyota production system, seeks to minimise the
variance between the actual number of units of a part
required by the assembly line and the average demand rate
on a product-unit-by-product-unit basis, while applying
penalties for observed shortages or overages [72]. Of
course, information sharing and partner coordination systems are a prerequisite for JIT procurements. For instance,
DELL, which achieved a highly coordinated supply chain
to respond to MC, communicated its inventory levels and
replenishment needs on an hourly basis with its key suppliers and required from the latter to locate their facilities
within a 15-min distance from DELL facilities [73].
Another consideration during inventory management is the
type of postponement applied in a company. Studies have
shown that postponement structures allow ﬁrms to meet the
increased customisation demands with lower inventory
levels in the case of time postponement (make-to-order), or
with shorter lead times in the case of form postponement
[74]. Also, an assemble-to-order process, a variation of

form postponement, does not hold inventory of the ﬁnished
product, while in form postponement, ﬁnished goods
inventory for each distinct product at the product’s
respective point of customisation is kept [75]. An indicative example is given in the case of Hewlett Packard, where
using form postponement, the company achieved the
postponement of the ﬁnal assembly of their DeskJet
printers to their local distribution centres [76].
3.5 Logistics management
Logistics can play a crucial role in optimising the position of the customer order decoupling point and balance
between demand satisfaction ﬂexibility and productivity
[77]. In a customer-centric environment, the supply chain
logistics must be organised and operated in a responsive
and at the same time cost-effective manner. Customisation of the bundle of product/services is often pushed
downstream the supply chain logistics, and postponement
strategies are utilised as an enabler for customisation
[78]. Maintaining the product in a neutral and noncommitted form for as long as possible, however,
implicates the logistics process. Traditional logistics
management systems and strategies need to be revisited
in the context of customisation, since distribution activities play a key role in achieving high product variety,
while remaining competitive. Most OEMs form strategic
alliances with third-party logistic (TPLs) companies. The
introduction of TPLs in the supply chain serves two
purposes. First, it acts as a means of reducing the
complexity of management for an OEM through shifting
the responsibilities of transportation, and in many times
customisation, to the TPLs [79]. Second, it extends the
customisation capabilities as TPLs can actively implement postponement strategies [80]. Postponement strategies with logistics as an enabler are located at the bottom
of Fig. 10 and can serve all types of customisation, from
plain shipment to order up to extremes of engineer-toorder or personalisation.


Make to
forecast

Packaging /
Labelling to
Order

Final
manufacturing
/ Assembling
to Order

Make to Order

Buy to Order

Engineer to
Order

Design

Design

Design

Design

Design

Design

Design

Purchasing

Purchasing

Purchasing

Purchasing

Purchasing

Purchasing

Purchasing

FabricaƟon

FabricaƟon

FabricaƟon

FabricaƟon

FabricaƟon

FabricaƟon

FabricaƟon

Assembly

Assembly

Assembly

Assembly

Assembly

Assembly

Assembly

Packaging

Packaging

Packaging

Packaging

Packaging

Packaging

Packaging

DistribuƟon

Pure Postponement
Purchasing
Postponement

Shipment to
Order

DistribuƟon

DistribuƟon

DistribuƟon

DistribuƟon

DistribuƟon

DistribuƟon

Manufacturing
Postponement
Assembly
Postponement
Packaging
Postponement
LogisƟcs
Postponement
Pure SpeculaƟon
StandardisaƟon
(CentralisaƟon)

Mass CustomisaƟon
(InternaƟonal Supply Chain)

PersonalisaƟon
(DecentralisaƟon)

Fig. 10 Postponement strategies for different supply chain structures and logistics (adapted from [81])

Moreover, the management of logistics is a process
inherently based on communication and collaboration.
Developments of either function-speciﬁc or all-in-one ICT
solutions targeted on logistics are analysed in [6, 82]. Tools
for warehouse and transportation management, ERP, supply chain management (SCM), and information sharing are
reported under the umbrella of e-logistics. The concept of
virtual logistics is also proposed for separating the physical
and digital aspects of logistics operations [83], having
Internet as an enabling means to handle ownership and
control of resources.
3.6 Supply chain control
The information transferred from one supply chain tier to the
next in the form of orders is often distorted, a phenomenon
known as the bullwhip effect. In particular, when customer
demand is volatile such as the case is in MP, the bullwhip
effect misguides upstream members of the supply chain in
their inventory and production decisions [84]. Nevertheless,
the performance of the supply chain is highly sensitive to the
control laws used for its operation. The application of the
wrong control policy may have as a result the ampliﬁcation
of variance instead on its minimisation. Dynamic modelling
approaches have been proposed to manage supply chains,
accounting for the ﬂow of information and material, to
capture the system dynamics [85]. Multi-agent approaches
for modelling supply chain dynamics are proposed in [86].
Software components known as agents represent supply
chain entities (supplier, dealers, etc.), their constituent control elements (e.g. inventory policy), and their interaction
protocols (e.g. message types). The agent framework utilises

123

a library of supply chain modelling components that have
derived after analysis of several diversiﬁed supply chains.
For instance, a novel oscillator analogy in presented in [87]
for modelling the manufacturing systems dynamics. The
proposed analogy considers a single degree of freedom mass
vibrator and a production system, where the oscillation
model has as input forces, while the manufacturing system
has demand as excitation. The purpose is to use this simple
oscillator analogy to predict demand ﬂuctuations and take
actions towards alignment.
Another necessity in supply chain control is the traceability of goods. Traceability methods, essential for perishable products and high-value shipments, exploit the
radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) technology during
the last years [88, 89]. A traceability system that traces lots
and activities is proposed by Bechini et al. [90]. The study
examines the problem from a communication perspective,
stressing the need to use neutral ﬁle formats and protocols
such as XML (extended markup language) and SOAP
(simple object access protocol) in such applications. The
emerging technology of IoT can provide ubiquitous traceability solutions. Combining data collection methods based
on wireless sensor network (WSN) with the IoT principles,
the method proposed in [91] can support the traceability of
goods in the food industry. In a similar concept, the role of
an IoT infrastructure for order fulﬁlment in a collaborative
warehousing environment is examined in [92]. The IoT
infrastructure is based on RFID, ambient intelligence, and
multi-agent system, and it integrates a bottom-up approach
with decision support mechanisms such as self-organisation and negotiation protocols between agents based on a
more complex as structures and less predictable in their
dynamic behaviour than stable traditional supply chains.
Recent complexity studies deal with the emerging aspects
of increasing complexity of manufacturing activities and
the dynamic nature of supply chains [93]. The importance
of managing the complexity in supply chains is evident, as
recent studies depict that lower manufacturing network
complexity is associated with reduced costs and overall
network performance [38, 94]. A complete and comprehensive review of complexity in engineering design and
manufacturing is presented in [95–97].
3.7 Simulation and ICT support systems
for manufacturing networks life cycle
Robust and ﬂexible ICT mechanisms are rendered necessary
for improving performance in each of the previous life cycle
aspects of supply chains and for bridging inter- and intraenterprise collaboration environments. Digital enterprise
technologies in general represent an established, new synthesis of technologies and systems for product and process
development and life cycle management on a global basis
[98] that brings many beneﬁts to companies. For instance, the
beneﬁts offered by the adoption of virtual engineering
through the life cycle of production are shown in Fig. 11
[99]. To manage the huge portfolio of products and variety,
as well as tracking the expanding customer base, ERP and
CRM suites are necessary tools. Additionally, cloud technology is already revolutionising core manufacturing
aspects and provides ample beneﬁts for supply chain and
manufacturing network life cycle. Cloud technology and the
IoT are major ICT trends that will reshape the way enterprises function in the years to come [100, 101].

Page 11 of 20 2

and operation phases. A simulation-based method to model
and optimise supply chain operations by taking into consideration their end-of-life operations is used to evaluate the
capability of OEMs to achieve quantitative performance
targets deﬁned by environmental impacts and life cycle
costs [102]. A discrete event simulation model of a capacitated supply chain is developed and a procedure to
dynamically adjust the replenishment parameters based on
re-optimisation during different parts of the seasonal
demand cycle is explained [103]. A model is implemented
in the form of Internet-enabled software framework, offering a set of characteristics, including virtual organisation,
scheduling, and monitoring, in order to support cooperation
and ﬂexible planning and monitoring across extended
manufacturing enterprise [58]. Furthermore, the evaluation
of the performance of automotive manufacturing networks
under highly diversiﬁed product demand is succeeded
through discrete event simulation models in [55] with the
use of multiple conﬂicting user-deﬁned criteria such as lead
time, ﬁnal product cost, ﬂexibility, annual production volume, and environmental impact due to product transportation. Finally, the application of the mesoscopic simulation
approach to a real-world supply chain example is illustrated
utilising the MesoSim simulation software [104, 105].
Existing simulation-based approaches do not tackle the
numerous issues of manufacturing network design in a holistic
integrated manner. The results of individual modules used for
tackling network design sub-problems often contradict each
other because they refer to not directly related manufacturing
information and context (e.g. long-term strategic scheduling
vs. short-term operational scheduling), while harmonising the
context among these modules is challenging. This shortcoming hinders the applicability of tools to real manufacturing
systems as it reduces the trustworthiness of results to the eyes
of the planner among other reasons.

3.8 Simulation for manufacturing network design
3.9 Enterprise resource planning
Literature on ICT-based systems for improving manufacturing networks is abundant and highlights the need for
increased penetration of ICT systems in design, planning,

Fig. 11 Increased efﬁciency
through virtual engineering
approaches (adapted from [99])

An ERP system is a suite of integrated software applications used to manage transactions through company-wide

ReducƟon in Time-toLoss Reduction
by Virtual
Engineering

market
Fewer to no physical
prototypes
ExaminaƟon of what-if
scenarios
Reusable, extensible
and sharable designs

procedures, and data sharing between and within functional
areas [106]. Such ICT systems entail major investments
and involve extensive efforts and organisational changes in
companies that decide to employ them. ERP systems are
becoming more and more prevalent throughout the international business world. Nowadays, in most production
distribution companies, ERP systems are used to support
production and distribution activities and they are designed
to integrate and partially automate ﬁnancial, resource
management, commercial, after-sale, manufacturing, and
other business functions into one system around a database
[107].
A trend, especially in the mid-market, is to provide
speciﬁc ERP modules as services. Such need generates the
challenge for ERP system providers to offer mobile-capable ERP solutions. Another issue is the reporting and
data analysis, which grows with the information needs of
users. Research in big data analytics and business intelligence (BI) should become more tightly integrated with
research and applications of ERP.
3.10 Customer relationship management
In Internet-based retailing, which is the preferred business
model followed in MC, customer information management
is a necessity. In particular, exploiting consumer data, such
as purchase history, purchasing habits, and regional purchasing patterns, are the cornerstone of success for any
company active in MC. In business-to-business and business-to-customer, CRM suites are thus indispensable.
According to Strauss and Frost [108], CRM involves, as a
ﬁrst step, research to gain insight so as to identify potential
and current customers. In a second step, customer information is used to differentiate the customer base according
to speciﬁc criteria. Finally, the third step involves customised offerings for those customers that are identiﬁed as
‘‘superior’’ from the previous phase, enabling thus, the
targeted offering of customised products. During the ﬁrst
step of identiﬁcation of customers, market research and
consumer behaviour models are used. In a second phase,
for establishing differentiation techniques, data mining and
KPIs assessment are used. Finally, for ﬁne-tuning customisation options, information such as price, variants,
promotions, and regions are examined [109].
As Internet becomes ubiquitous in business, CRM has
been acknowledged as an enabler for better customisation
since it offers management of the new market model less
disruptively. Internet-enabled CRM tools also bring the
customer closer to the enterprise and allow highly
responsive customer-centred systems without signiﬁcant
increase in costs [110]. e-CRM implementations have been
assessed in the study [111]. Noticeably, most major CRM

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:2

suite vendors have started providing cloud-based services,
a business model that suits SMEs that cannot afford huge
ICT investments. Based on the balanced scorecard method,
the study in [112] assessed e-CRM performance using 42
criteria in a number of companies. The results show that a
successful CRM implementation is associated with tangible outcomes, such as improvements in ﬁnancial indicators,
customer value, brand image, and innovation. Finally, the
latest generation of CRM tools, referred to as social CRM,
exploit social networking technology to harness information about customer insights and engagement.
3.11 Cloud computing and manufacturing
A comprehensive deﬁnition of cloud computing is provided
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology: ‘‘a
model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing
resources (e.g. networks, servers, storage, applications, and
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with
minimal management effort or service provider interaction’’ [113]. Several applications have been reported in
recent years where a cloud infrastructure is used to host and
expose services related to manufacturing, such as: machine
availability monitoring [114], collaborative and adaptive
process planning [115], online tool-path programming
based on real-time machine monitoring [116], manufacturing collaboration and data integration based on the
STEP standard [117], and collaborative design [118].
The beneﬁts of cloud for improving manufacturing
network performance are numerous (Table 1). Cloud can
offer increased mobility and ubiquitous information to an
enterprise since the solutions it offers are independent of
device and location. Moreover, computational resources
are virtualised, scalable, and available at the time of
demand. Therefore, the intensive costs for deploying highperformance computing resources are avoided. In addition
to that, purchasing the application using the model software
as a service is advantageous for SMEs who cannot afford
the huge investments that commercial software suites entail
[119]. However, there are some considerations also
(Table 1). A main challenge for the adoption of cloud in
manufacturing is the lack of awareness on security issues.
This major issue can be addressed using security concepts
and inherently safe architectures, such as privately
deployed clouds. The security concept must include
availability of ICT systems, network security, software
application security, data security, and ﬁnally operational
security. Considerable funding is spent by the global
security software market, in order to alleviate security
issues. Recent reports show that the expenditure on cloud
security is expected to rise 13-fold by 2018 [120, 121].

Table 1 Beneﬁts and drawbacks of cloud technology for manufacturing
Beneﬁts

Drawbacks

Increased mobility that allows decentralised and distributed
SCM

Lack of standardisation and protocols create hesitation in adoption of Cloud
solutions

Ubiquitous access to information context empowering decisionmaking

Security and lack of awareness on security issues, especially in SMEs, that are
part of supply chains/clusters

Device and location independent offering context-sensitive
visualisation of crucial data relevant to the mfg. network

Privacy issues generate legal concerns, identity management, access control,
and regulatory compliance

Hidden complexity permits the diffusion of ICT solutions even
to traditional, averted by disruptive solutions, sectors

Dependence on the cloud provider (provider stops providing services, absence
of contracts/regulation)

Virtualised and scalable on-demand computational resources
(problems of varied computational complexity)

Loss of control over data (assuring smaller companies that their data are not
visible by anyone in the supply chain, but the owner is challenging)

Low cost for SMEs that cannot afford huge ICT investments and
lack the know-how to maintain them

entrenched ideas, manufacturing processes and models
caused by the hesitation for the adoption of innovative
technology. Finally, the lack of standardisation and regulation around cloud hinders its acceptance by the industry
[122].

4 Challenges for future manufacturing
MC provides a set of enabling concepts and methods for
providing the customer with products they desire and for
organising production resources and networks to realise
these products. However, on a practical strategic, tactical,
and operational level, the tools for the realisation of MC
are under development and reﬁnement and a number of
issues related to the design of manufacturing networks and
their management are still not tackled in a holistic integrated manner. Several particular challenges need to be
addressed as described below. Possible solutions are also
proposed in the context of supporting a more efﬁcient
implementation of MC and personalisation.
4.1 Challenges for the manufacturing network life
cycle
Regarding supplier selection, existing frameworks that
handle both selection of suppliers, order allocation, and
capacity planning are rare in the literature. Therefore,
inconsistencies between the design phase and the actual
implementation of the supply chain are a common issue.
The problem most commonly treated jointly with supplier
selection is the order allocation problem, as reported in the
works of [123–125] among other. Moreover, several studies point out the difﬁculties of coordination between large
networks of stakeholders. Potential solutions in novel
approaches to tackling the issues generated in supply chain
coordination for the procurement of customised products

are proposed, such as in [126], where organisation ﬂatness
is proposed as a mediator for enhancing MC capability.
Flatness in cross-plant and cross-functional organisation
alleviate the need to decisions to pass through multiple
layers of executives, simplifying coordination and information sharing [127]. Among the several challenges for
conﬁguring robust manufacturing networks to satisfy MC
are the need for frameworks that handle the entire order
fulﬁlment life cycle (from product design to delivery),
methods to allow easy modelling and experimentation of
what-if scenarios and deeper examination of the impact of
product variety on the performance of manufacturing networks. On the ﬁeld of SCM, identifying the beneﬁts of
collaboration is still a big challenge for many. The deﬁnition of variables, such as the optimum number of partners, investment in collaboration, and duration of
partnership, are some of the barriers of healthy collaborative arrangements that should be surpassed [128]. Available solutions for lot sizing are following traditional
approaches and are not able to address the increasing
complexity of problems arising in the modern manufacturing network landscape. The economic order quantity
(EOQ), established for more than 100 years, still forms the
basis of recent lot sizing practices. In setups of complex
and changeable products, the problem of lot sizing
becomes extremely complex. Nevertheless, the optimality
of inventory and capacity planning is often neglected due
to increased complexity of the supply chain problems
which comes with higher priority. For instance, in multiagent manufacturing systems, each agent resolves inventory issues in its domain partition level, without clear
global optimisation overview [37]. Furthermore, the
broader role of logistics capabilities in achieving supply
chain agility has not been addressed from a holistic conceptual perspective [129]. Therefore, an open research
question is the relationship between logistics capabilities
and supply chain agility. Regarding ERP suites, apart from

implementation costs and disruptions caused in production
[130]. One reason for the low success rates in ERP
implementations is attributed to the organisation changes
needed for the industry that disrupt normal ﬂow of business. Another reason is that production planning, a core
function handled by currently deployed closed-loop MRPII
(manufacturing resource planning) and ERP suites, is performed through the fundamental MRP (material requirements planning) logic [1, 131]. This leads to the generation
of low-detail shop-ﬂoor schedules, assuming inﬁnite production capacity and constant time components, thus
leading to inﬂated lead times [132]. Challenges on the
technological level of ERP systems include delivery of
software as a service, mobile technology, tightly integrated
business intelligence, and big data analytics [133, 134].
Challenges in the ﬁeld of product data management (PDM)
are related to the efﬁciency of these systems with regard to
studying factors that affect the accessibility of product
data, for instance, the nature of data in different timeframes
of a development, the relationship between the maturity of
the data, and the probability of them being modiﬁed [135].
The deployment and tight integration of product life cycle
management (PLM) tools must also be considered since
they bring an abundance of beneﬁts against current manufacturing challenges. Yet these beneﬁts are still not
appreciated by many industrial sectors, mainly due to the
following reasons: (1) they are complex as a concept and
understanding their practical application is difﬁcult, (2)
they lack a holistic approach regarding the product life
cycle and its underlying production life cycle and processes, and (3) the gap between research and industrial
implementation is discouraging [136]. Concerning CRM,
although data rich markets can exploit the feedback of
consumers through social networks to identify user polarity
towards a product–service, improve its design, and reﬁne a
product service system (PSS) offering, only few initiatives
have tapped that potential.
Further challenges that are related indirectly to the
previous aspects are discussed hereafter. Concerning individual disparate software modules, it is often observed that
they contradict each other because they refer to not directly
related manufacturing information and context. The harmonisation, both on an input/output level and to the actual
contents of information, is often a mistreated issue that
hinders the applicability of tools to real-life manufacturing
systems. Limitations of current computer-aided design
(CAD) tools include: the complexity of menu items or
commands, restricted active and interactive assistance
during design, and inadequate human–computer interface
design (focused on functionality) [137]. To fulﬁl the needs
of modern manufacturing processes, computer-aided

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:2

process planning should be responsive and adaptive to the
alterations in the production capacity and functionality.
Nowadays, conventional computer-aided process planning
(CAPP) systems are incapable of adjusting to dynamic
operations, and a process plan, created in advance, is found
improper or unusable to speciﬁc resources [138]. Highlighted challenges for life cycle assessment (LCA) are
modularisation and standardisation of environmental proﬁles for machine tools, as well as modelling of ‘‘hidden
ﬂows’’ and their incorporation in value stream mapping
tools [139, 140]. Regarding knowledge management and
modelling, reusable agent-oriented knowledge management frameworks, including the description of agent roles,
interaction forms, and knowledge description, are missing
[141]. Moreover, ontologies used for knowledge representation have practical limitations. In case an ontology is
abstract, its applicability and problem-solving potential
may be diminished. On the other hand, in the case of very
speciﬁc ontologies, reasoning and knowledge inference
capacities are constrained [142]. Furthermore, in the turbulent manufacturing environment, a key issue of modern
manufacturing execution systems is that they cannot plan
ahead of time. This phenomenon is named decision myopia
and causes undoubtedly signiﬁcant malfunctions in manufacturing [143]. In the ﬁeld of layout design and material
simulation, some commercial software can represent
decoupling data from 3D model and export them in XML
or HTML format. While this is an export of properties, it
cannot fully solve the interoperability and extensibility
issues since the interoperability depends on how the different software and users deﬁne contents of data models
[144]. Concerning material ﬂow simulation, it can be very
time-consuming to build and verify large models with
standard commercial-off-the-shelf software. Efﬁcient simulation model generation will allow the user to simplify
and accelerate the process of producing correct and credible simulation models [145]. Finally, while the steady
decline in computational cost renders the use of simulation
very cost-efﬁcient in terms of hardware requirements,
commercial simulation software has not kept up with
hardware improvements.
4.2 Solutions for addressing the challenges
in the future manufacturing landscape
A view of the manufacturing system of the near future that
incorporates the latest trends in research and ICT developments and can better support MC is shown in Fig. 12. It
is envisioned that, fuelled by disruptive technologies such
as the IoT and cloud technology, entities within supply
chains will exchange information seamlessly, collaborate
more efﬁciently, and share crucial data in real time. Data

Strategic
level

Supply
chain

Cloud

•

Smart Grid

•

Internet of Things

Smart Buildings

•

TacƟcal
level

Smart Factory

OperaƟonal
level

Physical domain
WSN

Knowledge
Capture

Cloud

Data exchange

Cloud

WSN
Scalability in the
provided services

Cloud

Cyber-physical aggregaƟon

Pillar I - Product-Service
Design Assessment
Cyber domain
Pillar II - Decision-Making
Engines

InformaƟon Management Layer

Pillar III – ExecuƟon and
Control
Design and Decision-making Pillars

IntegraƟon / Interfacing

Legacy
InformaƟon
Management
Systems

PDM/PLM system
MPM system
ERP system
CRM system

•

Internet of Things

•

Internet of Services

•

Internet of People

•

Business Web

•

Experience
Reuse

Social Web

Legacy
Modelling,
CAM / CAPP Planning and
VisualisaƟon
Digital Factory
Systems
CAD tools

Fig. 12 View of manufacturing in the near future

supported by wireless sensor networks. The information
will be available on demand and on different degrees of
granularity empowered by big data analytics. Drilling
down to speciﬁc machine performance and zooming out to
supply chain overview will be practically feasible and
meaningful. The distinction between the physical and the
digital domains will become less clear. Besides, physical
resources are already considered as services under the
cloud manufacturing paradigm. A tighter coupling and
synchronisation between the life cycles of product, production, resources, and supply chains will be necessary,
while the distinction between cyber and physical domains
will become hazier. A discussion on potential directions for
adhering to this view of manufacturing is provided
hereafter.
New technologies and emerging needs render traditional
SCM and manufacturing network design models obsolete.
To support manufacturing network design, planning, and
control, a framework that integrates, harmonises, processes, and synchronises the different steps and productrelated information is needed. The framework will be
capable of supporting the decision-making procedure on all

organisation levels in an integrated way, ranging from the
overall management of the manufacturing network, down
to the shop-ﬂoor scheduling fuelled by big data analytics,
intuitive visualisation means, smart user interfaces, and
IoT. An alignment and coordination between supply chain
logistics and master production schedules with low-level
shop-ﬂoor schedules is necessary for short-term horizons.
The framework needs not be restricted on a particular
manufacturing domain; since it is conceived by addressing
universal industrial needs, its applicability to contemporary
systems is domain-independent. The constituents of the
framework are described hereafter.
The system will be supported by automated modelbased decision-making methods that will identify optimum
(or near-optimum) solutions to the sub-problems identiﬁed
above, such as for the problem of the conﬁguration of
manufacturing networks capable of serving personalised
product–services. The method must consider the capabilities of the manufacturing network elements (suppliers of
different tiers, machining plants, assembly plants, etc.) and
will indicate solutions to the warehouse sizing problem, to
the manufacturing plant allocation, and to the

requires interfacing with discrete event simulation models
of manufacturing networks and assessment of multiple
conﬂicting and user-deﬁned performance indicators.
The joint handling of order allocation, supplier selection, and capacity planning is necessary to alleviate
inconsistencies between the supply chain design and
implementation phases under a ﬂatness concept. The
incorporation of the entire order fulﬁlment life cycle is
additionally envisioned, enhanced with methods that allow
easy modelling and experimentation on what-if scenarios.
The relationship between logistics capabilities and supply
chain agility can also be revealed through this holistic view
of the constituents of the supply chain.
Regarding SCM, collaboration concepts based on cloud
computing and cloud manufacturing are a game changer.
Through the sharing of both ICT as well as manufacturing
resources, SMEs can unleash their innovation potential and
thus compete more easily in the global market.
Further to that, the measurement and management of the
manufacturing network complexity should be considered as
a core strategic decision together with classical objectives
of cost, time, and quality. Handling a variety of market
excitations and demand ﬂuctuations is the standard practice
even today in many sectors, while this trend is only bound
to intensify. In parallel, a risk assessment engine should
correlate complexity results and leverage them into tangible risk indicators. Complexity can then be efﬁciently
channelled through the designed network in the less risky
and unpredictable manner.
To address the increasing complexity of problems arising in the modern manufacturing network landscape, the lot
sizing and material planning need to be tightly incorporated
to the production planning system. The consideration of
capacitated production constraints is needed in order to
reﬂect realistic system attributes. A shared and distributed
cloud-based inventory record will contain information
related to MRP and ERP variables (e.g. projected on-hand
quantities, scheduled order releases and receipts, changes
due to stock receipts, stock withdrawals, wastes and scrap,
corrections imposed by cycle counting, as well as static
data that describe each item uniquely). This record should
be pervasive and contain dataset groups relevant to intradepartmental variables, as well as datasets visible only to
suppliers and relevant stakeholders, in order to increase the
transparency of operations.
The mistreated issues of deployment and tight integration of PLM, ERP, and CRM tools must also be tackled
through interfacing of legacy software systems and databases for seamless data exchange and collaboration. Software as a service PLM, ERP, and CRM solutions available
to be purchased per module will be the ideal ownership
model since it allows greater degree of customisation of

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:2

solutions, more focused ICT deployment efforts, and
reduced acquisition costs. CAD/CAM, PDM, and MPM
(manufacturing process management) systems and databases will be interfaced and interact with digital mock-ups
of the factory and product–services solutions as well for
synchronising the physical with the digital worlds. In
addition, the knowledge capturing and exploitation is pivotal in the proposed framework. Product, process, and
production information is acquired from production steps
and is modelled and formalised in order to be exploited by
a knowledge reuse mechanism that utilises semantic reasoning. This mechanism is comprised of an ontological
model that is queried by the knowledge inference engine
and allows the retrieval of knowledge and its utilisation in
design and planning phases. The developments should also
mediate the deeper examination of the impact of product
variety on the performance of manufacturing networks.
In parallel, there is an urgent need of standardisation and
harmonisation of data representation for manufacturing
information, for example: the product information (BoM,
engineering-BoM and manufacturing-BoM [146]), the
manufacturing processes (bill of processes—BoP) including the manufacturing facilities layout, the associated
relations (bill of relations—BoR), and related services (Bill
of Services—BoS) should be pursued through a shared data
model. Moreover, the product complexity needs to be
assessed based on functional product speciﬁcations using,
for instance, design structure matrices (DSM) [147], which
incorporate components (BoM), the required manufacturing and assembly processes (BoP) including sequences/plans, relationships (BoR), and the accompanying services
(BoS). The complexity of the product in relation to the
manufacturing network and service activities (impact on
delivery time and cost, and effect on the overall reliability)
will be quantiﬁed and will be incorporated in the decisionmaking process.
Last but not least, it should be noted that the components
of the proposed framework must be offered following a
software as a service delivery method and not as a rigid allaround platform. The framework should act as a cloudbased hub of different solutions, offering web-based
accessibility through a central ‘‘cockpit’’ and visualisation
of results through common browser technology and handheld devices (tablets, smartphones, etc.).

5 Conclusions
The ability to customise a product/service is offered to
consumers for many years now, while truly unique products will be requested in the near future by users around the
globe [148] using the Internet as a means of integration in
at dispersed sites, and the diverse cooperation in networks
increase the complexity of production [149]. Agility,
reconﬁgurability, and synchronisation from process up to
supply chain levels are necessary in order for companies to
respond effectively to the ever-changing market needs
[150]. Driven by the ever-increasing need to reduce cost
and delivery times, OEMs are called to efﬁciently overcome these issues by designing and operating sustainable
and efﬁcient manufacturing networks.
This work reviewed the existing literature related to the
basic aspects of a manufacturing network life cycle within
the MC landscape. The focus was to study existing practices and highlight the gaps in the current approaches
related to these aspects of manufacturing network design,
planning, and operation. Afterwards, the identiﬁcation of
future directions of academic and industrial research is
proposed. Departing from that, major drivers and enabling
technologies are identiﬁed and concepts that can lead to a
more sustainable implementation of MC are proposed.
Summing up, the theoretical foundations of MC have
been laid for many years now [150]. Still, there is an
apparent gap between the theoretical and the actual application of MC, and bridging this gap is a challenging task
that needs to be addressed. A safe conclusion reached is
that the complexity generated in manufacturing activities
due to the exploding product variety requires a systematic
approach to be considered during the design, planning, and
operating of the entire manufacturing system [5]. All in all,
piecemeal digitalisation of manufacturing network is not a
viable option; revisiting of the entire supply and manufacturing network life cycle is essential for sustainability.
The pursuit for a smoother, more efﬁcient, more rewarding,
and eco-friendly manufacturing is ongoing.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creative
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

150. Pine BJ (1992) Mass customisation: the new frontier in business
