
1 Introduction
This article assesses the time evolution of a fundamental economic variable, the
inﬂation rate, for the case of the Spanish economy. More speciﬁcally, it focuses on
consumption prices from a geographically disaggregated (provincial) perspective
over two well-differentiated periods of time (1955.1–1978.6, 1978.7–2014.4). It is
worth noting that overall Spain is a country characterized by a mild inﬂation
differential relative to the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) core—
Caraballo and Usabiaga (2009c).1 The analysis of the time series properties of
province-level inﬂation rates in Spain and their convergence patterns is conducted
with PANIC (panel analysis of non-stationarity in idiosyncratic and common
components) as well as with the pairwise approach of Pesaran (2007a). From an
econometric point of view, these provincial data allow us to build panels with higher
N (50 provinces instead of 17 regions) and higher T, which is important for the
application of the PANIC methodology.2 The understanding of the behavior of
provincially disaggregated inﬂation rate series enables us to better understand the
evolution of aggregate inﬂation as well as to disentangle the importance of national
forces from province-speciﬁc factors in explaining inﬂation rate variability and in
identifying the sources of inﬂation heterogeneity. By focusing on a panel of
province-level inﬂation rates within the same country, the identiﬁcation of the
province-speciﬁc idiosyncratic component and the nationally driven common
component is also very important from a policy standpoint. Imagine, for instance,
that the analysis gives evidence that a province like Santa Cruz de Tenerife has a
strong and persistent idiosyncratic component and a weak common component. If
that is the case, this would imply that policy measures implemented at regional level

1

On the price-setting process in the Spanish economy, from different perspectives, we recommend the
´
´
numerous articles by Alvarez and coauthors. See, just as a sample Alvarez and Hernando (2006) and
´
Alvarez et al. (2010).
2
´
Romero-Avila and Usabiaga (2012) also use, among others, these provincial inﬂation series to study
´
inﬂation persistence. Unlike the present study that focuses on panel methods, Romero-Avila and Usabiaga
(2012) exclusively used univariate unit root tests (without considering breaks) and persistence measures
like the median-unbiased estimates of the persistence parameter and the half-life of a shock. Another
difference is that there, the authors studied not only provincial CPI-based inﬂation rates, but also
aggregate, regional, and group-level CPI-based inﬂation rates in addition to aggregate and sectoral
Producer Price Index (PPI)-based inﬂation rates. The evidence broadly supported the presence of a very
high level of persistence, which in many instances (particularly in the case of CPI-based inﬂation rates) is
In the current scenario of EMU, it is natural to expect provincial inﬂation rates to
be affected not only by external common shocks and national policies (e.g., ﬁscal
policies and labor and goods market reforms), but also by such supranational
policies as the common monetary policy. In that scenario, persistent inﬂation
differentials across provinces can be conducive to different provincial interest rates,
with clear implications on investment and aggregate demand. It is also appealing to
focus on Spanish province-level inﬂation since in a currency union inﬂation
differentials lead to realignments of the real exchange rate among provinces, which
have strong implications for the relative competitiveness of the different provinces
within the same country. The further disaggregation of province-level inﬂation rate
series into the inﬂation rates of the 12 COICOP groups of goods and services also
enables us to investigate the importance of the Balassa–Samuelson effect—and its
different predictions on the behavior of the prices of goods in the tradable and nontradable sectors—across the 50 provinces forming our sample.4 According to this
hypothesis, convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates should be more
prevalent in those groups involving tradable goods, since trade across provinces
would help eliminate the arbitrage opportunities. In contrast, there would be less
evidence of convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates for those groups
mainly composed of non-tradable goods and services. Whether regions with initially
low price levels converge to higher price levels via tradables or non-tradables is also
relevant for the degree of persistence of inﬂation differentials. If convergence
operates through tradables, its implications are probably transitory, whereas if
convergence works through non-tradables and the associated gradual process of
productivity convergence, the implications are likely to be long-lived (Rogers
2007).
Aside from the ﬁnding supporting a lower extent of pairwise convergence for the
Communications group (involving mainly non-tradables), which would accord with
the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis, the bulk of the evidence does not allow us to
3

Note that the statistical justiﬁcation for using PANIC goes hand in hand with the economic intuition of
the technique and the policy implications that one can derive from the results. The key is the
decomposition of the observed series into a common and idiosyncratic component, and in turn the
determination of their degree of integration, which enables us to establish whether idiosyncratic and/or
common shocks or policies can have transitory or permanent effects on inﬂation, depending on the degree
of integration of either component.

4

It is worth recalling that in this ﬁeld it is even customary to work with data from cities or municipalities.
In a well-known study, Rogers (2007) works with data of cities from Europe and the USA (1990–2004).
He highlights that there is a striking decline in dispersion for traded goods prices in Europe, most of
which took place prior to the launch of the euro. Still, this process has not yet signiﬁcantly affected the
cross-city ordering of price levels. That dispersion in the euro area would be now quite close to that of the
USA. Several potential factors responsible for the decline in dispersion in Europe are the harmonization
of tax rates, convergence of income and labor costs, liberalization of trade and factor markets, and
increased coherence of monetary policy. This study also concludes that the Balassa–Samuelson effect
does not explain much of the observed inﬂation rate differentials across European cities. Rogers (2001,
2007) point out that despite an on-going process of convergence, deviations from the ‘‘law of one price’’
are still large. Factors other than price convergence explain most of the cross-country inﬂation
non-tradables. The lessons that can be drawn from the results obtained for the
Spanish provinces are also relevant for other open economies, such as several in
Latin America, to the extent that they share with the Spanish economy some key
features as the degree of openness, central bank behavior, ﬁscal policy stance, etc.
The ﬁnding of widespread convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates for
both tradables and non-tradables implies that there may not be substantial regional
heterogeneities in the relative productivity growth of the tradable versus the nontradable sector. This is very relevant for many Latin American countries for which
real exchange rate ﬂuctuations affect economic activity due to their specialization in
commodity exports and their high dependence on imported capital goods. To the
extent that there is convergence in productivity levels, the price of non-tradable
goods also converges, and ﬂuctuations in the real exchange rate across sub-national
units thus fall. This would also make it easier for countries to access world ﬁnancial
markets in order to ﬁnance their trade imbalances, which helps smoothing
consumption. Taking now a national perspective for those Latin American countries
that peg their currencies to the dollar, their high volatility in productivity growth due
to their high dependence on production and exports of primary goods requires high
variability in domestic Consumer Price Index (CPI)-based inﬂation for the Balassa–
Samuelson hypothesis to hold.5 Hence, situations of slow growth caused by
recurrent adverse supply shocks impose equilibrium domestic inﬂation rates below
the US inﬂation rate. This can be achieved through a revaluation of the exchange
rate or through contractionary ﬁscal and monetary policies, which would further
harm growth and employment. These undesirable results could be prevented by
adopting a ﬂexible exchange rate regime, at the expense of the negative effects of
having higher variability in the nominal exchange rate.
The use of PANIC conveys several advantages over standard methodologies
employed to analyze convergence in inﬂation. First, it enables us to decompose the
observed inﬂation rate series into a common and an idiosyncratic component as well
as to determine the source of non-stationarity in the observed series, that is, whether
it stems from the common factor(s) and/or the idiosyncratic components. Second, by
allowing for common factors in the series, this technique controls for strong forms
of cross-sectional dependence in the data such as cross-cointegration, which is
essential to prevent severe size distortions in the tests—see O’Connell (1998),
Maddala and Wu (1999) and Banerjee et al. (2005). Third, this approach is
sufﬁciently ﬂexible as to allow for a different order of integration in both
components. Fourth, by encompassing both unit root and stationarity statistics that
shift their respective null hypotheses, this framework enables us to gather
conﬁrmatory evidence on the stochastic properties of inﬂation. Fifth and most
important, PANIC can be used as a cointegration framework without requiring the
choice of a reference province in the computation of the inﬂation gaps, i.e., the
series measuring the inﬂation differentials between two individual series. The
5

´
´
Drine and Rault (2003) and Garcıa-Solanes and Torrejon-Flores (2005) provide clear-cut evidence of
the empirical validity of the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis in Latin America only when panel
^
part explained by the common stochastic trends (^1 ) plus N À r1 cointegrating
r
vectors involving stationary linear combinations of the individual series forming the
panel. This provides information about the extent of convergence among the
inﬂation rate series. If the evidence favors a common stochastic trend together with
the existence of jointly stationary idiosyncratic series, there would be pairwise
cointegration (and convergence) among individual provincial inﬂation rates, which
would be driven by a non-stationary common factor linking all inﬂation rates over
time.
For robustness purposes, we use an alternative test of pairwise convergence
developed by Pesaran (2007a), which allows us to test whether all cross-provincial
inﬂation differentials (pairs) are stationary with several unit root and stationarity
tests. Like PANIC, this method does not require selecting a reference province in
the computation of the inﬂation differentials between two individual series, and as
such, it is not sensitive to this choice.
As already laid out, in our work we intend to shed some light upon whether there
has been a change in the pattern of behavior of Spanish inﬂation over the last
decades. In our analysis, a structural break is considered. In order to determine it
endogenously, we use the procedure proposed by Lee and Strazicich (2003, LS). For
the crash model the mean shift is located at July 1978. Instead of dealing with the
Spanish overall inﬂation rate directly, we address a major geographic disaggregation. Consequently, we make use of the 50 Spanish provinces’ inﬂation rates
(excluding the Autonomous Cities of Ceuta and Melilla due to the lack of consistent
data), which will compel us to employ panel data techniques (PANIC methods, in
our case), thereby allowing us to capture the econometric nature of the series under
study through their decomposition. Likewise, in the second part of our article our
focus will be more directed towards the topic of the spatial convergence of the
variable involved and its potential underlying factors—taking some relevant
economic and labor variables into account, in a ﬁrst step, and CPI weightings, in a
second one. By and large, our analysis will show, from different viewpoints, that
there has indeed existed a pattern change in that a more intense spatial convergence
in inﬂation rates has taken place in recent decades. It bears recalling that using
disaggregated data at a provincial level is not commonplace in this type of work and
it is indeed less usual than concentrating on regional data, thereby rendering our
results more original in this regard.
Overall, the PANIC analysis demonstrates not only the notable persistence of
Spanish inﬂation, but also the higher importance of the common component of the
series in the second period analyzed—which links provincial inﬂation rate series
together—thereby leading to strong convergence. The evidence from the pairwise
test of Pesaran (2007a) appears to largely back up these ﬁndings. Besides inﬂation,
we focus on a battery of economic and labor variables, mostly by scrutinizing
regional data, and conclude that they converge as well, mainly throughout our
second period of analysis—with the exception of the real gross value added (GVA)
per capita, which converges faster in the ﬁrst period.
The result of high inﬂation persistence in Spain should not be viewed as striking,
inertia—or implicit persistence—) seem to be quite deep-seated in the Spanish
economy. Thus, in this regard, the Spanish economy has long been plagued with a
myriad of different types of wage and price rigidities—which give rise to a low
sensitivity to the business cycle—, widespread indexation and a signiﬁcant
importance of backward-looking expectations, among other factors.6 Moreover,
Spain is regarded as being a highly service-oriented economy, which means that
labor costs account for an important fraction of total costs—the tertiary sector is
known to be a labor-intensive one. This fact manifests itself as a greater persistence
in ﬁnal prices, with respect to other sectors whose inputs prices are proven to be
more ﬂexible. Another Spanish economy’s predicament, to some extent shared with
other Southern European countries, lies in the barriers to competition in certain
sectors and product markets. Notwithstanding several reforms and statements such
as those associated with the strengthening of the Single Market, there is still
considerable room for improvement in this area in Spain, as there is limited
ﬂexibility in some prices. Take for instance the issue of the Spanish energy prices.
In essence, this dimension of our outcome (inﬂation persistence), which is brought
into light by our PANIC analysis reinforces the previous results in this area.
A ﬁnal exercise consists of a multivariate regression analysis aimed at
determining the factors responsible for Spanish inﬂation. In our view, given the
characteristics of the Spanish economy, all the signs from the multivariate analysis
are plausible, in terms of the Phillips curve, the non-wage price pressure, the
disinﬂationary competition and sectoral specialization patterns—given the problems
and rigidities of the goods and labor markets in Spain. Finally, the negative sign of
the coefﬁcient on real GVA per capita growth does not support the validity of the
Balassa–Samuelson effect.
The remainder of our article is structured as follows. Section 2 conducts a review
to further contextualize our work in the related literature. Section 3 presents the
PANIC approach. Section 4 makes a description of the inﬂation data employed and
analyzes the choice of the break considered. Section 5 comments on the results
obtained from the PANIC analysis and provides an alternative test of pairwise
convergence. Section 6 carries out an analysis utilizing some additional variables
other than inﬂation, also paying attention to CPI weightings and testing the Balassa–
Samuelson hypothesis. Finally, Sect. 7 concludes.

6

´
´
Galı and Lopez-Salido (2001), within the framework of the recent literature about the Phillips curve—
´
see Galı and Gertler (1999)—, emphasize the role of wage frictions and the backward-looking component
of inﬂation expectations. That second factor is also stressed by Fabiani et al. (2006). Restoy et al. (2005)
point to the problem of the Spanish dual inﬂation. Likewise, they highlight the relevant role of wage
´
indexation. Caraballo and Dabus (2013) and Caraballo and Usabiaga (2009a, b) present evidence for the
presence of menu costs—or other nominal rigidities—in the determination of Spanish consumer and
producer prices. The latter also focuses on the vulnerability of Spanish inﬂation to adverse oil shocks.
Finally, we should underline that the labor reforms undertaken between 2010 and 2012 (Bentolila et al.
2012), which supposedly have decreased workers’ and trade unions’ bargaining power, might have
affected those aforesaid labor variables (reducing wage indexation, removing, at least partially, the
2.1 Disinﬂation and inﬂation convergence: evidence and lessons for Latin
America
One geographic area that has long struggled to end high and chronic inﬂation is
Latin America. Latin American countries have endured bouts of high inﬂation and
hyperinﬂation in the recent past and some of them (mainly Venezuela and
Argentina) are currently grappling with this scourge again. For the remaining
countries, on a general basis inﬂation has come down from high numbers in the 70s,
80s and 90s to more moderate rates in the present decade. It is worth mentioning
that, in addition to opening themselves up to trade, countries like Mexico, Chile,
Peru, Colombia and Uruguay are known to have been quite successful in bringing to
birth a full-ﬂedged inﬂation-targeting regime.7 The inﬂation rates after the
implementation of the new framework plummeted in all these economies.8
Additionally, to be sustainable, this monetary arrangement calls for the conduct
of a more rigorous ﬁscal policy which may have also played some role in helping
drive inﬂation down over time.9 It is important to mention that the evidence mostly
points to the existence of a positive relation between the interplay of globalization
and monetary policy, via the incentives that the former raises for central banks to
behave prudently, and disinﬂation.
To our knowledge, the literature on the effects of the interaction of the
aforementioned factors on inﬂation convergence within countries is fairly scant,
especially in Latin America. Intuitively, a country’s regions, subject to the same
monetary policy and roughly similar structural reforms and ﬁscal policies, should in
principle experience long-run inﬂation convergence (Yilmazkuday 2013). Moreover, if, as a consequence of a further step taken toward a deeper economic and
monetary integration, some of these joint policies are carried out at a supranational
level, while others are inﬂuenced or restricted by common rules set at the same
level, a stronger sub-national inﬂation convergence is likely to occur, at least
throughout the initial stages of the process.
From a policy-oriented perspective, we view this analysis as relevant since nonnegligible differences in real interest rates could arise within the country did
regional inﬂation rates differ from each other, due for instance to distinct cyclical
positions across these regions’ economies, thereby perpetuating diverging economic
performances at regional level. Besides, persistent differences in inﬂation might
reﬂect permanent structural rigidities that prevent the regions hardest hit by shocks
from adjusting swiftly.
7

Brazil is another inﬂation targeter in the region, but we have elected to leave it out of our comments as
it is a relatively closed economy.

8

´
See Blake et al. (2015), for an application to Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, and Garcıa-Solanes
´
and Torrejon-Flores (2012), for the same countries plus Brazil.

9

To get a sense of how important ﬁscal discipline can be under an inﬂation-targeting regime, see
Mishkin (2000), for a general application to a set of emerging-market economies, Blanchard (2005), on
just chose because of data and empirical evidence availability. In the case of the
former, to the best of our knowledge, only studies on regional (relative) price
convergence can be found. Sonora (2005) tests whether the PPP hypothesis holds
across Mexico’s main cities. His results show that there is relative price
convergence in the long run. Furthermore, he also suggests that prices are relatively
ﬂexible, which runs counter to the slower long-run price convergence found for US
´
´
´
and Canadian data. Gomez-Aguirre and Rodrıguez-Chavez (2013a, b) also examine
price convergence across the main Mexican cities by employing panel data unit root
tests. Their ﬁndings in both papers coincide with Sonora’s: absolute price parity
holds in the long run. As far as inﬂation convergence is concerned, a quick
inspection of Mexican provincial inﬂation rate data (Instituto Nacional de
Estadıstica y Geografıa) provides a clue as to whether there has been regional/
´
´
provincial inﬂation convergence over time. A simple sigma-convergence analysis
leads us to think this has been the case. Mexico is a NAFTA member and is
therefore relatively integrated by commercial and ﬁnancial ties with the US and
Canada, and with the rest of the world as well. This relevant economic integration,
coupled with sound economic policies, in part due to the necessary consistency with
the status of being a more open economy, may have contributed to this regional/
local inﬂation convergence coming about over time.
´
On the Peruvian economy, Winkelried and Gutierrez (2012) show that the central
bank of Peru, by having targeted Lima’s inﬂation, has been in fact inﬂuencing the
economy-wide inﬂation,10 which in the end constitutes an indication that regional
inﬂation rates have converged over time. By means of a multivariate dynamic model
of inﬂation comprising the main nine regions in the country, they conclude that the
relative PPP holds among pairs of regional inﬂations. Again, Peru is an economy
whose recent progress on the macroeconomic and institutional front has been
remarkable. This virtuous cycle, in a way sparked by these aforementioned good
policies,11 has materialized itself in considerable economic growth rates and low
inﬂation.12 A steady convergence in regional inﬂation is an expected outcome given
the policies put in place from the 90s onwards.
As may be seen, the Spanish case that we choose to analyze in this article can be
generalized to other open economies, such as several in Latin America, to the extent
that these latter economies share certain characteristics with the Spanish economy
(degree of openness, central bank behavior, ﬁscal policy stance, etc.).

10
As the authors themselves say, Peru is a heavily centralized country, as Lima concentrates about a
third of the country’s population and used to represent more than 70 % of national expenditure.
11

Some economists assert that ‘‘good luck’’ seems to have played a greater role than good policies have
in causing Peru’s notable economic performance—see for example Mendoza (2013).
12
Although risks stemming from external shocks like the fall in commodity prices on international
markets and the foreseeable US monetary policy tightening, along with the fact that Peru is still a partially
After the view of the processes of disinﬂation and convergence in inﬂation in Latin
America, we are going to concentrate now on the Spanish case, logically placed
within the euro area context. The process of Spanish disinﬂation in the past decades
is well-known, and it has been widely studied using mainly the SVAR method´
ology—see the survey by Gomez and Usabiaga (2001).
As regards convergence, there exist several strands in the literature covering
price level convergence, inﬂation convergence and inﬂation differentials. Although
logically those literatures are closely related, each one of those research lines has
some economic and econometric speciﬁc features. On the inﬂation rates and their
convergence, main topic of our paper, there are more country-based case studies
than region-based ones. For instance, there is a lot of literature on this topic for
Western European countries. One can also ﬁnd abundant literature on the euro area
countries’ inﬂation differentials—see de Haan (2010) for a survey as well as several
ECB publications.
Although with slight caveats, related to the price indices, the time periods, or the
countries considered, in general, for the euro area countries inﬂation convergence
´
has been reported—see for instance Montuenga-Gomez (2002), Busetti et al. (2007)
and Beck et al. (2009)—, mainly before the mid-90s. However, there still exist
signiﬁcant and persistent inﬂation differentials in the euro area (de Haan 2010),
which even allow classifying countries under different categories or clusters—see
´
for instance Montuenga-Gomez (2002) and Busetti et al. (2007).
Beck et al. (2009, p. 153), with the euro zone in mind, present the following
classiﬁcation of the potential underlying factors in inﬂation differentials—de Haan
(2010) uses a roughly similar classiﬁcation—: (1) differences between the actual
positions of the economies within their business cycles, asymmetric shocks, and
asymmetric effects of area-wide impulses such as monetary impulses, exchange rate
movements or oil price changes. (2) The Balassa–Samuelson effect. (3) Inappropriate domestic policies or other unwarranted domestic developments such as
misaligned ﬁscal policies, immoderate wage evolution, or other production input
factor price developments. (4) Nominal wage and price rigidities. Beck et al. (2009)
point out that the most worrisome factors are those of the two last types.
There is no clear consensus on the speciﬁc underlying sources of the inﬂation
differentials among the euro area countries, although there may be a consensus
about the fact that they are rooted on structural or institutional factors—see for
instance Jaumotte and Morsy (2012) and Beck et al. (2009). In this respect,
Jaumotte and Morsy (2012), for a panel of 10 euro area countries (period
1983–2007), conclude that in order to reduce the persistent inﬂation differentials the
following labor elements have to be reformed: high employment protection,
intermediate coordination of collective bargaining and high union density. In this
line, de Haan (2010) highlights that most empirical research suggests that EMU has
not spurred labor market reform. However, Beck et al. (2009) do not emphasize the
labor factors for the regional euro area inﬂation differentials. In their opinion, those
differentials are mainly accounted for by the costs of the non-wage input factors, the
and region-speciﬁc structural characteristics. They also remark that there is
considerable heterogeneity in the economic structure of euro area regions such that
even symmetric impulses—such as a monetary policy shock—can have heterogeneous effects.
From the analysis of the regional inﬂation rates of the euro area countries, Beck
et al. (2009) state that national factors matter. Thus, the dispersion is higher among
the regions of all the European countries analyzed (Austria, Finland, Germany,
Italy, Norway and Spain) than among the regions of each country. In addition,
differences are substantially more pronounced across regions than across country
averages. These authors assert that the strong inﬂuence of the national factor very
likely stems both from nationally conducted ﬁscal policy and nationally determined
labor market institutions. In comparison to US regional inﬂation rates, the euro area
regional rates show a slightly higher degree of dispersion and persistence. Using a
factor model, Beck et al. (2009) ﬁnd that the variation in euro area regional inﬂation
rates is explained following these proportions: area-wide factors 50 %, national
factors 32 %, regional elements 18 % (Spain: national factors 26.8 %, regional
factors 24.6 %). They come to the conclusion that the Spanish differential in this
respect can probably be explained by the relatively high degree of independence
that Spanish regions enjoy.
Several works highlight that the monetary policy followed by EMU could have
generated convergence effects also at regional level, due to its effect on expectations
and other factors. For instance, Beck et al. (2009) state that the area-wide monetary
policy can considerably contribute to regional inﬂation stabilization even though it
cannot take regional developments into account when making its decisions. Apart
from Beck et al. (2009), other works also report regional inﬂation convergence. For
instance, Busetti et al. (2006) conduct an analysis of the price level and the inﬂation
rate for the monthly series of the CPI in 19 Italian regional capitals over the
1970–2003 period, concluding that the convergence process is stronger for the
inﬂation rate. Gozgor (2013) also observes convergence in Turkish regional
inﬂation rates (period 2004–2011).
Yilmazkuday (2013) tackles a more disaggregated analysis of regional inﬂation,
in the line of the works related to the Balassa–Samuelson literature. He works with
ten main CPI groups for each region, distinguishing between groups concentrated on
tradable and non-tradable components (period 1994–2004). In this study a break in
Turkish inﬂation is captured in 2002, and in 2001 for the cross-sectional standard
deviation of regional inﬂation rates. This author distinguishes between a preinﬂation targeting period and an inﬂation targeting period (which coincides with a
ﬂexible exchange rate) starting from January 2002. As in our study, Pesaran
(2007a)’s methodology is used, among other techniques—Arestis et al. (2014) also
use that technique, but applied to countries’ inﬂation. As acknowledged by
Yilmazkuday (2013), the results of this work require further study since during the
inﬂation targeting period the CPI groups with relatively tradable components have
diverged from each other, while the non-tradable groups have converged to each
other. Caraballo and Usabiaga (2009c) share some elements of the disaggregated
goods and services over the 1994–2015 period, we are able to uncover some
interesting patterns. With the exception of the Communications group involving
mainly non-tradables, all the other groups of goods and services appear to exhibit a
high degree of convergence among pairs of inﬂation rates across provinces. This
indicates that convergence in provincial inﬂation rates is widespread across groups
of goods and services, irrespective of the tradables/non-tradables distinction.
It is well accepted that the Balassa–Samuelson effect fails to account for the euro
area inﬂation dynamics—see ECB (2005), Rogers (2007) and Beck et al. (2009).
The Spanish economy is not an exception in this regard, maybe because some of its
assumptions do not hold in that economy; for instance features like a rather
centralized wage determination, a low labor mobility, etc. (Jimeno and Bentolila
´˜
1998), run counter to its central assumptions. Juselius and Ordonez (2009) point out
that the potential Balassa–Samuelson effect has more inﬂuence over the high
unemployment than over prices. Rabanal (2009) concludes that the Balassa–
Samuelson effect does not appear to be an important driver of the inﬂation
differential Spain-EMU during the EMU period, although a gap in labor
productivity between tradable and non-tradable sectors can be noted. In addition,
´
Alberola and Marques (2001) reject the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis at Spanish
regional level. Finally, in Beck et al. (2009) this theory is not supported for the
Spanish regions. To sum up, there is overwhelming evidence against the relevance
and explanatory power of that hypothesis for the Spanish economy. Our results do
not support the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis since there is not a signiﬁcantly
higher degree of convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates for tradables,
relative to non-tradables (of course bearing in mind the exception of the
Communications sector). Likewise, our multivariate regression analysis provides
evidence of a signiﬁcantly negative impact of real GVA per capita growth on the
inﬂation rate, which runs counter to the positive effect that would be predicted
according to the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis.

3 PANIC approach
Different from most second-generation panel unit root tests that only allow for weak
forms of cross-sectional dependence (contemporaneous short-run cross-correlation),
some panel unit root tests relying on linear factor models can enable stronger forms
of cross-dependence such as cross-sectional cointegration. Among the panel
procedures that use a factor structure are Moon and Perron (2004), Pesaran (2007b)
and Bai and Ng (2004a, b, 2010). While Pesaran (2007b) just allows for one
common factor, Moon and Perron (2004) and Bai and Ng (2004a, b, 2010) allow for
multiple common factors. Nevertheless, only the panel tests of Bai and Ng (2004a,
b, 2010) are sufﬁciently general to allow for cointegration across units, which
entails that the observed series can include common stochastic trends. Actually,
under this framework the observed series is broken down into a common and an
case of cross-cointegration, the tests of Pesaran (2007b) and Moon and Perron
(2004) probably display size distortions, as the common trends may be confused
with the common factors and thus taken away from the data in the defactoring
process. Hence, the tests on the observed series seem to yield stationarity if the
remaining idiosyncratic component is stationary, in spite of the presence of nonstationary common factors.
Let us model the observed data on inﬂation rates (denoted by pit ) as the sum of a
deterministic part, a common component and an idiosyncratic error term:
pit ¼ Dit þ k0i Ft þ eit

ð1Þ

where ki is an r Â 1 vector of factor loadings, Ft is an r Â 1 vector of common
factors, and eit is the idiosyncratic component. Dit can contain a constant and a
linear trend. Since ki and Ft can only be estimated consistently when eit $ Ið0Þ, we
estimate a model in ﬁrst-differences like Dpit ¼ k0i ft þ zit , where zit ¼ Deit and
^
ft ¼ DFt .13 We next use principal components to estimate the common factors (ft ),
0^
^
^
z
the corresponding factor loadings (ki ) and the residuals (^it ¼ Dpit À ki ft ), so that we
preserve the order of integration of Ft and eit . As in Bai and Ng (2002), we normalize pit for each cross-section unit to have a unit variance. The common factors
P
P
^
^
^
and the residuals are then obtained as follows: Ft ¼ ts¼2 fs and eit ¼ ts¼2 zis ,
^
which can be used to test for a unit root in the common and idiosyncratic components, respectively.
3.1 Determining the number of common factors
Prior to testing for a unit root in the common and idiosyncratic components, we
make use of information criteria to set the number of common factors contained in
the panels of inﬂation rate series. We do so with the BIC3 information criterion:


ðN þ T À kÞ lnðNTÞ
^e
^e
ð2Þ
BIC3 ðkÞ ¼ r2 ðkÞ þ kr2 ðkmaxÞ
NT
^e
where k is the number of factors included in the model, r2 ðkÞ is the variance of the
^e
estimated idiosyncratic components, and r2 ðkmax Þ is the variance of the idiosyncratic components estimated with the maximum number of factors (kmax = 5).14
^
The optimal number of common factors (k) is chosen by applying
arg min0 k 5 BIC3 ðkÞ. The BIC3 is elected over other alternatives (like the ICp
information criteria) because for a general enough framework in which the
idiosyncratic errors can be serially correlated and cross-correlated, the BIC3
13
This representation amounts to the factor model with a constant. For the representation in the case of a
speciﬁcation with a trend, we refer to Bai and Ng (2004a, p. 1137).
14

The second argument in the loss function stands for the penalty for overﬁtting, which aims to correct
for the fact that models with a larger number of factors can at least ﬁt as good as models with fewer
common factors, but efﬁciency is reduced with the estimation of more factor loading parameters (Bai and
Perron (2007) point out that the BIC3 criterion performs better in selecting the
number of factors when min(N, T) is small.
3.2 Analysis of the idiosyncratic component
Before digging deeper into the methodology behind the PANIC approach, it is worth
noting that the unit root tests of Bai and Ng (2004a, 2010) and the stationarity tests
of Bai and Ng (2004b) have been combined, always within the PANIC framework,
as dictated in the original articles.15 Bai and Ng (2004a) estimate standard
Augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) speciﬁcations for a unit root in the idiosyncratic
components:
^
D^it ¼ di;0 ei;tÀ1 þ
e

pi
X

di;j D^i;tÀj þ uit
e

ð3Þ

j¼1

The ADF t-statistic for testing di;0 ¼ 0 is denoted by ADFc ðiÞ or ADFs ðiÞ for the
^
^
e
e
cases of only a constant and a constant and a linear trend in speciﬁcation (1),
respectively.16 To raise statistical power, Bai and Ng (2004a) deploy pooled
statistics based on the Fisher-type inverse Chi square tests of Maddala and Wu
(1999) and Choi (2001). Letting pc ðiÞ be the p-value associated with ADFc ðiÞ, the
^
e
^
e
pooled statistics are constructed as follows17:
Pc ¼ À2
^
e

N
X

d

log pc ðiÞ À x2
! ð2NÞ
^
e

for N fixed;

T!1

ð4Þ

i¼1

c
Ze
^

¼

À

PN

i¼1

log pc ðiÞ À N d
^
pﬃﬃﬃﬃ e
À Nð0; 1Þ for N;
!
N

T!1

ð5Þ

We also employ the two Moon and Perron (2004) type pooled tests utilizing the
PANIC residuals to estimate a bias-corrected pooled PANIC autoregressive
estimator, and a panel version of the Sargan–Bhargava (1983) statistic using the
sample moments of the residuals without the need to estimate the pooled
autoregressive coefﬁcients. A great advantage of the PANIC pooled statistics of

15
The use of unit root statistics (for the case of testing the unit root null hypothesis) along with
stationarity statistics (for the case of testing the stationarity null hypothesis) allows us to carry out a
conﬁrmatory analysis of the stochastic properties of the inﬂation rate series. See more details in Shin and
Snell (2006, p. 136).
16

The asymptotic distribution of ADFc ðiÞ is the same as the Dickey–Fuller distribution for the case of no
^
e
constant, while that of ADFs ðiÞ is proportional to the reciprocal of a Brownian bridge.
^
e
17
The same holds for the case of a trend, where ps ðiÞ is the p-value associated with ADFs ðiÞ. The pooled
^
e
e
^
s
statistics for the trend speciﬁcation are denoted as Ps and Ze . Note that we do not pool individual unit root
e
^
^
tests for the observed series, since under a factor structure the limiting distribution of the test would
^
contain terms that are common across units. However, ‘‘pooling of tests for eit is asymptotically valid
^
could give rise to a fall in statistical power.
3.3 Analysis of the common component
An ADF test is used to test for non-stationarity in the common factor. When the
panel only has one common factor, as it is our case, we estimate an ADF
b
speciﬁcation for F t with the same deterministic components as in model (1):
^
^
DFt ¼ Dt þ c0 FtÀ1 þ

p
X

^
cj DFtÀj þ vt

ð6Þ

j¼1

The corresponding ADF t-statistics are denoted by ADFc^ and ADFs^ and follow
F
F
the limiting distribution of the Dickey and Fuller (1979) test for the speciﬁcations
with only a constant, and a constant and a trend, respectively.
3.4 Stationarity tests for the common and idiosyncratic components
As noted above, the stationarity test of Kwiatkowski et al. (1992, KPSS) is used and
applied to both the common and idiosyncratic components following Bai and Ng
(2004b). The univariate KPSS tests for the idiosyncratic components are denoted by
Sc ðiÞ and Ss0 ðiÞ depending on whether trends appear or not in the speciﬁcation, and
^
^
e
e
the tests for the common factors are Sc^ and Ss^. The limiting distribution of Sc^ and
F
F
F
Ss^ are those derived by KPSS for the cases of a constant, and a constant and a linear
F
^
trend, respectively. However, the limiting distribution for testing eit depends on
^
whether Ft is I(0) or I(1). If all factors are I(0), Sc0 ðiÞ and Ss0 ðiÞ follow the
^
^
e
e
distribution of the KPSS tests for the cases of a constant, and a constant and a trend,
respectively. But if the factor is I(1), as it is our case, stationarity in the idiosyncratic
component implies cointegration between the observed series and the I(1) common
factor. In that case, we have to employ univariate cointegration tests denoted by
Sc1 ðiÞ and Ss1 ðiÞ, which have the limiting distribution of the cointegration test of
^
^
e
e
Shin (1994).
With respect to the computation of pooled statistics, when the common factors
are stationary, the p-values associated with the univariate KPSS tests for the
idiosyncratic components can be used to compute the pooled tests of Maddala and
Wu (1999) and Choi (2001). Otherwise, pooling is not valid since the nonstationarity of the common factors is transmitted to the residuals under the null
hypothesis of stationarity because it does not fade away even asymptotically.18

18
This analysis is conducted with MATLAB routines kindly provided by Serena Ng at http://www.
4.1 Data description
The main data we deploy in this article are CPI data,19 spanning from 1955.1 until
2014.4 at a monthly frequency, and they are sourced from INE (Instituto Nacional
de Estadıstica). We avail ourselves of year-on-year numbers so as to avoid the
´
seasonality problem. The data correspond to provincial capitals (up to 1992) and to
provinces themselves thereafter. Connecting both kinds of series, without manipulating them, proves unproblematic. We have only engaged in two very speciﬁc
manipulations of our inﬂation series in order to correct for two anomalous
ﬁgures related to the province of Zamora, in 1960.1 and 1961.1.20 In spite of having
access to previous years, we have decided to stick to 1955 as the ﬁrst year of our
study mainly for three reasons: (1) because we would not like to go too far back in
time, since our analysis neither aims to adopt an economic history approach nor to
deal with episodes too far back in history. (2) Because data might cease to be
statistically trustworthy as we move backwards in time, this trust being a
fundamental factor for the econometric analysis conducted. (3) Because for
additional assessments we make use of some other series, in addition to inﬂation,
which mostly start after 1955.
Our work’s basic data (inﬂation rate) is a panel made up of 50 (N, provinces) by
712 (T, months). Nevertheless, for our purposes, the aforesaid panel is split into two
different sub-samples. Indeed, in what follows, our article attempts to clarify
whether the behavior of the provincial inﬂation rate varies between sub-periods. But
before turning to the PANIC analysis, we next try to determine through econometric
techniques where the break is located, as a better alternative to exogenously
imposing it.
4.2 Determination of the endogenous break in inﬂation
In order to determine the most likely break in the provincial inﬂation rate series, we
need to ﬁnd the most likely common structural shift that is affecting all the series
simultaneously.21 The avenue we take for that is to test for structural instability in
the common stochastic trend that is driving all province-speciﬁc inﬂation rate series
over the whole period. To identify the break location we follow the procedure
proposed by Lee and Strazicich (2003). Unlike the Lumsdaine and Papell (1997)
unit root test which is derived assuming no breaks under the null hypothesis, the unit
root test of LS allows for breaks under both the null and alternative hypotheses. As
pointed out by LS, rejection of the null with the Lumsdaine and Papell (1997) test
only indicates rejection of a unit root without breaks, whereas the alternative does
19
Unfortunately, the existing data do not enable us to conduct an analysis of production prices akin to the
one implemented in this work.
20
Given that they were a very low value and a very high one, respectively, we have opted to give it the
second lowest value and the second highest value, respectively, as they were more suitable altogether.
21
´
Multiplier (LM) score principle, LS estimate the following regression:
~
Dpt ¼ d0 DZt þ /StÀ1 þ

k
X

~
ci DStÀi þ et

ð7Þ

1

~
~
~
~
where StÀ1 represents the detrended series such that St ¼ pt À wX À Zt d, for t = 2
~ is a vector of coefﬁcients estimated from the regression of Dpt on DZt and
… T. d
~
~
wX ¼ p1 À Z1 d, where p1 and Z1 are the ﬁrst observations of pt and Zt respectively,
and Zt is a vector of exogenous variables deﬁned by the data generation process of
the inﬂation rate series. The crash model allows for one shift in the intercept such
that Zt ¼ ½1; t; DU1t 0 .22 The mixed change model allows for one change in level and
slope, as given by Zt ¼ ½1; t; DU1t ; DT1t 0 .
The unit root null hypothesis is given by / ¼ 0 versus the alternative that /\0,
~
and the LM t-statistic is deﬁned by s (t-statistic testing the null hypothesis that
/ ¼ 0). The minimum LM unit root t-statistic determines the endogenous location
of the break (k ¼ TB =T) by using a grid search over all possible break points such
~
that LMs ¼ inf k sðkÞ. To correct for serial correlation, we control for a sufﬁciently
large number of augmentation terms (k) by employing the general to speciﬁc
approach proposed by Ng and Perron (1995), setting kmax = 12.23
For the crash model the mean shift is located at July 1978, whereas for the mixed
change model the shift in mean and slope appears located at April 1979. Given the
non-trending behavior exhibited by the inﬂation rate, we base our conclusions on
the crash model which points to the existence of a mean shift at July 1978. The
cross-province mean inﬂation rate for the ﬁrst regime equals 9.4 %, whereas it
equals 5.8 % for the post-break regime, implying a clear downward shift in the
mean inﬂation rate after the break took place. In addition, it is interesting to point
out that the value of the LM unit root test of LS for the crash and mixed change
models is -2.155 and -2.795, respectively, both values well below (in absolute
terms) the respective 10 % critical values (-3.504 and -4.989). This indicates the
existence of a unit root in the common factor for the whole period after accounting
for one structural break in the mean (and slope) of the series.
For robustness purposes, we also applied the generalized least squares (GLS)based unit root tests allowing for one break under both the null and alternative
´
hypotheses proposed by Carrion-i-Silvestre et al. (2009). These tests include the
class of modiﬁed tests (M tests), originally proposed by Stock (1999), and later
extended by Perron and Ng (1996) and Ng and Perron (2001). The latter apply local22
Our model allows for a structural break under the null and the alternative, thus controlling for a change
in level under the alternative and for a one-period jump under the null hypothesis.
23

To sum up, this approach presents several methodological advantages. First, the distribution of the tstatistic does not depend on nuisance parameters on the break location under the null. Second, the
minimum LM t-statistic allows for a break under the null and alternative, which avoids the possibility of
spurious rejections caused by size distortions (Lee and Strazicich 2001). Third, the location of the break
and the degree of augmentation are endogenously and jointly determined prior to the computation of the
LM unit root t-statistic. This analysis is conducted with GAUSS routines kindly provided by Junsoo Lee
the deterministic components of an ADF regression (see Elliot et al. 1996) so that
important gains in statistical power can be achieved. More speciﬁcally, we employ
the ADFGLS test ﬁrst proposed by Elliot et al. (1996), which is the t-statistic for
testing the existence of a unit root with a speciﬁcation where the underlying series is
detrended with GLS prior to estimation by OLS. The M GLS -class of tests includes
MZGLS and MZGLS which are modiﬁed versions of the Za and Zt Phillips and Perron
a
t
(1988) tests, MSBGLS which is a modiﬁed version of the Sargan and Bhargava
(1983) test, the feasible point optimal test ðPGLS Þ and the modiﬁed feasible point
T
optimal test ðMPGLS Þ.24 In this case, the break is located at August 1977, which is
T
very close to the break date identiﬁed with the LS procedure. Since a visual
inspection of Fig. 1 appears to favor a major downward shift in mean inﬂation in the
middle of 1978, we stick to the result obtained from the application of LS methods.
Still, it is reassuring that both methods render fairly similar results. Not surprisingly
either, none of the GLS-based unit root tests is able to reject the unit root null
hypothesis at conventional signiﬁcance levels,25 thus supporting the non-stationarity
of the common factor.
Our initial working hypothesis, which turns out to be conﬁrmed throughout our
analyses, is that from the break identiﬁed (1978.7) up to the present day a number of
relevant economic, political and institutional changes, both at the national and
international levels, have necessarily left their imprints on the inﬂation rate, among
other variables. This changing pattern is intended to be captured, in a ﬁrst step, via
PANIC, and in a second step, via other convergence assessments.
The break identiﬁed can be largely thought of as a turning point in Spanish
economic policy relative to Franco’s dictatorial regime, leading to a period of a high
reformist vigor brought about by the new democratic period that encompassed
almost every economic area, both within the country itself and further aﬁeld,
spurred by the ﬁrm intention of Spain to access to the European core. As regards
Spanish internal policy, which has been progressively constrained by the European
integration process, after the Pactos de la Moncloa (1977)—a battery of urgent
policy measures in response to the peak in inﬂation—, one of the ﬁrst measures
taken was the adoption of the medium-term economic program 1983–1986 (updated
twice afterwards). In this program, on the one hand, some adjustment policies were
put into place with the aim of correcting the main macroeconomic imbalances, and,
on the other hand, several structural reforms were fostered in order to better
articulate the productive fabric of the country and enhance the efﬁcient functioning

24

For these tests to exhibit good size properties, it is crucial to select the appropriate lag truncation (k) of
the ADF speciﬁcation. For that purpose, Ng and Perron (2001) develop the modiﬁed Akaike information
criterion which aims at selecting a relatively long lag-length in the presence of a large negative moving
average root (thus preventing size distortions) and a short lag-length when that root is not present (thus
avoiding unnecessary loss of power). In our application, we take a maximum lag truncation of 12. This
analysis is conducted with GAUSS routines kindly provided by Pierre Perron at http://people.bu.edu/
perron/code/Replication-codes-ET-2009.zip.

25


40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

Fig. 1 Evolution of Spanish provincial inﬂation rates. Inter-annual data. 1955.1–2014.4

of the markets.26 It is also indisputable that the initiatives in favor of the European
integration, and the legislative alignment that ensued from that, were crucial during
those years which ended with Spain entering the European Economic Community
(EEC) on January the 1st 1986. Within this process, the Maastricht Treaty called for
central banks’ independence of those countries aiming to join the Single Currency,
which in the case of Spain led to the approval of the Law of Autonomy of the Bank
of Spain (Law 13/1994). In the context of EMU, an inter-annual inﬂation target
around 2 % was established.27
In case the justiﬁcation of the timing of the break, based on institutional, political
and economic grounds, was deemed insufﬁcient, Fig. 1 plots the evolution of the
provincial inﬂation rates for both periods analyzed. Even at ﬁrst glance, it is easily
observable that the nature of the series appears to have undergone a transformation
between periods. Apart from a lower average inﬂation in the second period,28 even
in those months in which inﬂation is at similar levels across both periods, a lower
dispersion for the second one is perceived.
26
On the adjustment measures, in addition to a strong commitment to income policies, great importance
was placed on a restrictive monetary policy stance and on ﬁghting inﬂation. This economic strategy was
generally perceived to be the appropriate one at that time, following the second oil shock. As for the
structural reform package, during those years a multitude of measures were conducted, like the industrial
and energy restructuring, transformation of public enterprises, etc. We should also remember that the
Spanish labor market approached the way a genuine market is supposed to function essentially from the
break proposed onwards, right after trade unions were legalized in 1977, and the emergence of Workers’
Statute in 1980.
27

On the European integration process, from an economic perspective, see for example Baldwin and
Wyplosz (2013). From a regional point of view, see for example Cuadrado-Roura and Parellada (2002),
Fingleton (2003) and Maza and Villaverde (2011).
28
It should be remembered that there exists a strand of literature on the positive relation between average
5.1 Analysis of cross-sectional dependence
Before we implement the PANIC analysis, two cross-dependence tests are applied
to ascertain the likely existence of cross-correlation in inﬂation innovations for the
two panels of inﬂation rate series under scrutiny. These tests are those put forward
by Breusch and Pagan (1980) and Pesaran (2004). Pesaran’s test rests on the average
^
of pair-wise correlation coefﬁcients (qij ) of OLS residuals derived from standard
ADF regressions for each individual. The order of the autoregressive model is
selected using the t-sig criterion in Ng and Perron (1995), with the maximum
number of lags set at p ¼ 4ðT=100Þ1=4 . This test adopts the form
 d
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃPNÀ1 PN
^
qij À Nð0; 1Þ. The CD statistic tests the
CD ¼ 2T=ðNðN À 1ÞÞ
!
i¼1
j¼iþ1
null hypothesis of cross-sectional independence, is distributed as a two-tailed
standard normal distribution and exhibits good ﬁnite-sample properties. Moreover,
Breusch and Pagan (1980) test the null hypothesis of cross-sectionally independent
P
P
d
^2 ! 2
errors via the following LM statistic: CDlm ¼ T NÀ1 N
i¼1
j¼iþ1 qij À xNðNÀ1Þ=2 Þ.
Even though throughout the analysis all the outcomes for the speciﬁcation both with
and without trends are computed, as inﬂation is often portrayed as a variable of the
second type, we concentrate on the evidence obtained for the speciﬁcation with no
trends.29 For the two panels we are able to reject the null hypothesis of crosssectionally independent errors at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance with both the CD test
and the Breusch and Pagan LM test (Table 1). This in turn supports the use of
PANIC that allows for cross-sectional dependence so that large size distortions in
the tests are avoided—see O’Connell (1998), Maddala and Wu (1999) and Banerjee
et al. (2005).
5.1.1 Optimal number of common factors
Before testing for a unit root in the idiosyncratic series and common factors in
which the inﬂation rate series forming the two panels are broken down, the common
factors are estimated through principal components and the number of factors
present in the two panels investigated is then selected. Table 2 displays the results
from the application of the BIC3 criterion to the two panels of inﬂation series. This
criterion picks one common factor for the two panels. Since Bai and Ng (2002)
provided evidence that the BIC3 criterion performed remarkably well in the
presence of cross-correlations and Gengenbach et al. (2010, p. 134) offered
simulation evidence of the superior performance of the BIC3 criterion for shortN panels, and given the difﬁculty in establishing the number of common factors in
panels with relatively short N, we will undertake the decomposition of the inﬂation
rate series as if there existed one common factor, as speciﬁed by the BIC3 criterion.
29
As will become apparent below, the main results are fairly robust to the inclusion of a linear trend in
No trend speciﬁcation

Trend speciﬁcation

CPI. 50 provinces
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces
1978.7–2014.4

CPI. 50 provinces
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces
1978.7–2014.4

LM test

491.383a

2383.475a

488.076a

2390.468a

CD test

a

a

a

338.767a

152.845

338.290

152.327

The CD-statistic and the LM-statistic test for the null of cross-sectional independence. The CD-statistic is
distributed as a two-tailed standard normal distribution and the LM-statistic as a v2
NðNÀ1Þ=2 distribution
a

Implies rejection of the null hypothesis at the 1 % signiﬁcance level

Table 2 BIC3(k) information criterion
Number of factors (k)

CPI. 50 provinces
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces
1978.7–2014.4

0

3.1637

0.4657

1

2.5974a

0.2857a

2

2.8457

0.3059

3

3.1098

0.3279

4

3.3886

0.3515

5

3.6732

0.3781

a

Represents the lowest value of the information criteria. See the text for the equation associated with the
information criterion

5.2 PANIC analysis of the panel of CPI-based inﬂation rates for the Spanish
provinces
5.2.1 First period results
Table 3 presents the results of the univariate ADF and KPSS tests applied to the
idiosyncratic series, the respective univariate tests for the common factor as well as
the pooled statistics of Bai and Ng (2004a, 2010) for the panel of CPI-based
inﬂation rate series for the 50 Spanish provinces over the period 1955.1–1978.6. The
aim is to determine the source of non-stationarity in Spanish provincial inﬂation,
i.e., whether the common and/or idiosyncratic series are non-stationary. In this case,
the BIC3 procedure selected only one common factor.
Furthermore, as the univariate statistics applied to the common factor yield unclear
evidence as to whether the common component is stationary or not (since the ADFc^ and
F
ADFs^ statistics favor the stationarity hypothesis, whilst the KPSSc^ and KPSSs^
F
F
F
statistics lend support to the unit root hypothesis), we apply the IPC1, IPC2 and IPC3
information criteria of Bai (2004) as an alternative and more reliable methodology to
No trend speciﬁcation
ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

k

Trend speciﬁcation
Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

k

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

´
Alava

4

-3.969***

0.103

0

-3.990***

0.092

0.713

1.808

Albacete

0

-4.315***

0.282*

0

-4.611***

0.110*

0.621

2.513
2.728

Alicante

5

-4.327***

0.099

2

-4.582***

0.067

0.566

´
Almerıa

0

-3.904***

0.056

0

-4.115***

0.056

0.604

2.299

Asturias
´
Avila

0

-3.997***

0.072

0

-4.182***

0.068

0.704

2.018

0

-3.956***

0.102

0

-4.360***

0.101*

0.713

2.020

Badajoz

8

-4.871***

0.053

0

-4.879***

0.052

0.579

3.554

Balears, Illes

5

-3.026***

0.386**

5

-2.917**

0.190***

0.814

1.452

Barcelona

0

-3.631***

0.092

0

-3.801***

0.085

0.773

2.223

Bizkaia

1

-4.503***

0.187

1

-5.116***

0.072

0.734

2.348

Burgos
´
Caceres

1

-2.855***

0.199

1

-3.317***

0.047

0.790

2.568

5

-4.361***

0.284*

5

-4.368***

0.039

0.713

2.504

´
Cadiz

2

-4.048***

0.100

2

-4.089***

0.077

0.621

2.501

Cantabria
´
Castellon

0

-4.841***

0.113

0

-4.861***

0.065

0.796

1.747

2

-3.493***

0.403**

2

-3.781***

0.100*

0.647

1.758

Ciudad Real

0

-3.315***

0.226

0

-3.823***

0.064

0.793

1.429
2.678

´
Cordoba

0

-2.263**

0.245*

0

-3.055**

0.062

0.481

˜
Coruna, A

7

-3.194***

0.601***

7

-3.345***

0.194***

0.679

2.894

Cuenca

3

-3.709***

0.193

2

-4.115***

0.106*

0.476

2.903

Gipuzkoa

6

-4.536***

0.171

6

-4.670***

0.043

0.642

2.732

Girona

1

-3.995***

0.228

1

-4.087***

0.071

0.826

2.256

Granada

0

-4.153***

0.117

0

-4.306***

0.092

0.616

2.984

Guadalajara

1

-4.610***

0.073

1

-4.615***

0.056

0.699

2.496

Huelva

0

-4.262***

0.107

2

-4.252***

0.063

0.692

2.854

Huesca
´
Jaen

4

-3.838***

0.216

4

-4.414***

0.114*

0.689

2.441

0

-4.883***

0.068

0

-4.876***

0.054

0.639

2.371

´
Leon

2

-5.574***

0.142

2

-5.555***

0.052

0.583

2.646

Lleida

0

-3.462***

0.134

0

-3.565***

0.068

0.755

2.075

Lugo

0

-4.357***

0.043

0

-4.586***

0.027

0.706

2.334

Madrid

1

-3.878***

0.467**

1

-4.187***

0.209***

0.545

2.426

´
Malaga

0

-4.878***

0.276*

0

-4.877***

0.061

0.642

2.531

Murcia

3

-3.824***

0.051

0

-4.072***

0.037

0.478

3.477

Navarra

0

-3.068***

0.073

0

-3.605***

0.035

0.659

2.131

Ourense

5

-5.854***

0.039

5

-5.858***

0.025

0.745

2.371

Palencia

0

-4.587***

0.056

0

-4.587***

0.056

0.581

3.382

Palmas, Las

3

-2.388**

0.755***

3

-3.459***

0.072

0.879

1.259

Pontevedra

2

-3.528***

0.421**

2

-4.335***

0.026

0.742

2.182

Rioja, La

8

-3.044***

0.262*

5

-3.015**

0.121*

0.713

1.947

Salamanca

0

-4.158***

0.079

0

-4.174***

0.081

0.684

No trend speciﬁcation
ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

k

Trend speciﬁcation
Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

k

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

Santa Cruz
de
Tenerife

2

-3.187***

0.475**

2

-4.164***

0.057

0.947

0.607

Segovia

0

-4.200***

0.069

0

-4.299***

0.052

0.641

3.076

Sevilla

0

-4.951***

0.182

0

-4.991***

0.066

0.632

2.607

Soria

3

-2.820***

0.115

3

-2.792**

0.105*

0.725

2.173

Tarragona

3

-4.006***

0.097

0

-4.002***

0.096

0.645

3.100

Teruel

1

-3.876***

0.199

1

-4.062***

0.147**

0.778

2.225

Toledo

4

-3.443***

0.704***

4

-3.980***

0.062

0.816

1.779

Valencia

0

-5.692***

0.096

0

-5.747***

0.049

0.687

1.853

Valladolid

0

-3.199***

0.107

0

-3.241***

0.081

0.744

1.807

Zamora

0

-2.091**

0.139

0

-2.738**

0.129**

0.751

1.290

Zaragoza

1

-5.986***

0.036

1

-6.000***

0.035

0.581

3.021

Critical
values
1%

-2.580

0.536

-3.167

0.185

5%

-1.950

0.324

-2.577

0.122

10 %

-1.620

0.235

-2.314

0.098

Bai and Ng (2004a) pooled statistics
Pc
^
e

809.457***

N.A.

Ps
^
e

810.675***

N.A.

c
Ze
^

50.166***

N.A.

s
Ze
^

50.252***

N.A.

Bai and Ng (2010) pooled statistics
Pc
a

-70.372***

Ps
a

-51.347***

Pc
b

-17.300***

Ps
b

-18.592***

PMSBs

-6.358***

PMSBc
Common
factor
analysis

Statistic

ADFc^
F
Sc^
F

-4.972***
Critical values

Statistic

1%

5%

10 %

-2.783*

-3.430

-2.860

-2.570

ADFs^
F

1.185***

0.743

0.463

0.343

Ss^
F

Critical values
1%

5%

10 %

-3.427**

-3.960

-3.410

-3.120

0.371***

0.215

0.149

0.120

The augmented autoregressions employed in the ADF analysis select the optimal lag-order with the t-sig
criterion of Ng and Perron (1995), setting a maximum lag-order equal to p ¼ 4ðT=100Þ1=4 . The stationarity tests are based on 12 lags of the Quadratic spectral kernel. The information criterion BIC3 has
chosen an optimal rank equal to 1. Pe is distributed as v2 , with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values of 135.807,
^
100
124.342 and 118.498, respectively. Ze is distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values equal to
^
2.326, 1.645 and 1.282, respectively. Pa , Pb and PMSB are distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 %
critical values of -2.326, -1.645 and -1.282, respectively. ***, ** and * imply rejection of the null
only one common stochastic factor.30 Thus, if the common factor is found to be nonstationary, and the idiosyncratic components are I(0) stationary, there would be
evidence of pair-wise cointegration among the inﬂation rate series pertaining to the
panel.
We next turn to testing for a unit root in the idiosyncratic series. The evidence seems
to mostly favor stationarity of the idiosyncratic series even at the univariate level since
the unit root null is rejected with the ADF statistic for all the provincial series at the 1 %
´
level, except for three provinces (Cordoba, Las Palmas and Zamora) for which the null
is rejected at the 5 %. The application of the Shin statistic (as the presence of one nonstationary common factor kept us from using the KPSS test) renders conﬁrmatory
evidence of stationarity for 37 provinces. For the rest (13 provinces), the evidence
appears inconclusive as the stationarity null is also rejected in this case (for 3 provinces
at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance, 5 at the 5 % and 5 at the 10 %), as occurred with the
unit root null with the ADF statistic.31 To supply evidence of the stochastic properties of
the idiosyncratic component for the panel as a whole, we apply the pooled Fisher-type
inverse Chi square tests of Maddala and Wu (1999) and Choi (2001) along with the
PANIC pooled Moon–Perron and Sargan–Bhargava statistics. It is worth highlighting
that we are able to reject the joint non-stationarity null hypothesis with the ﬁve pooled
statistics at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance, regardless of the inclusion of deterministic
trends in the idiosyncratic series speciﬁcations. Hence, there is overwhelming evidence
of the joint stationarity of the idiosyncratic component of the panel under study.
Columns 8 and 9 of Table 3 show the ratio of the standard deviation of the
idiosyncratic component to the standard deviation of the observed data (both
expressed in ﬁrst-differences), and the ratio of the standard deviation of the common
component to the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic component respectively, to
get a sense of the relative importance of the common and idiosyncratic components.
The average values of those ratios are 0.69 and 2.32, respectively.32
Overall, the ﬁnding that the source of non-stationarity in the panel is a common
stochastic trend driving the non-stationarity in the observed series has become
apparent. Both this fact and the presence of a jointly stationary idiosyncratic
component combine to render evidence of pairwise cointegration among the
Spanish provincial inﬂation rate series.
5.2.2 Second period results
Table 4 presents the results of the univariate ADF and KPSS tests applied to the
idiosyncratic series, the respective univariate tests for the common factor as well as
30
Unlike the information criteria to determine the optimal number of common factors (stationary and
non-stationary) in Bai and Ng (2004a, b) that are applied to data in ﬁrst-differences, the IPCp panel
information criteria to determine the number of non-stationary common factors proposed by Bai (2004)
are applied to level data. In addition, the consistency of Bai (2004)’s information criteria requires the
idiosyncratic component to be I(0), which we will ﬁnd below to be the case.
31

These results are very similar for the trend speciﬁcation.

32

As laid out by Bai and Ng (2004b), if all variations are idiosyncratic, the ﬁrst ratio should take a value

0

8

Granada

Guadalajara

Huelva

Huesca

2

´
Castellon

8

7

Cantabria

Girona

5

´
Cadiz

2

1

´
Caceres

0

2

Burgos

Gipuzkoa

1

Bizkaia

Cuenca

0

Barcelona

1

5

Balears, Illes

˜
Coruna, A

0

Badajoz

0

1

8

4

Asturias
´
Avila

´
Cordoba

-5.079***

4

´
Almerıa

Ciudad Real

-2.763***

8

Alicante

-4.032***

-3.011***

-5.199***

-5.377***

-4.414***

-3.642***

-4.685***

-2.781***

-5.243***

-6.191***

-6.442***

-7.205***

-3.923***

-3.972***

-7.806***

-1.824*

-4.111***

-7.753***

-4.082***

-3.722***

-5.769***

-3.058***

7

Albacete

-4.337***

5

´
Alava

k

ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

No trend speciﬁcation

0.089

0.073

0.101

0.046

0.119

0.386**

0.101

0.122

0.186

0.283*

0.219

0.192

0.068

0.083

0.130

0.447**

0.420**

0.067

0.073

0.057

0.091

0.115

0.068

0.293*

0.148

Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

Table 4 PANIC analysis of CPI inﬂation. Spanish Provinces. 1978.7–2014.4

8

3

3

5

8

2

0

1

0

0

2

3

5

2

2

3

1

3

0

0

4

4

8

7

5

k

-5.438***

-4.153***

-5.132***

-5.370***

-4.848***

-6.034***

-6.507***

-4.841***

-5.127***

-6.725***

-6.403***

-7.666***

-4.791***

-4.041***

-8.060***

-2.959**

-4.638***

-8.751***

-4.335***

-5.082***

-3.964***

-4.311***

-5.884***

-4.592***

-5.455***

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Trend speciﬁcation

0.029

0.046

0.083

0.046

0.070

0.062

0.038

0.078

0.160**

0.089

0.062

0.124**

0.068

0.064

0.063

0.159**

0.166**

0.061

0.062

0.042

0.063

0.087

0.042

0.109*

0.057

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

0.615

0.423

0.455

0.476

0.426

0.616

0.346

0.619

0.375

0.478

0.591

0.412

0.531

0.485

0.529

0.503

0.538

0.521

0.426

0.556

0.498

0.607

0.425

0.478

0.523

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

3.869

4.205

4.684

4.820

5.012

2.587

3.451

2.706

4.572

4.737

4.561

4.703

5.720

3.707

5.359

3.543

4.125

4.964

4.715

3.218

2.880

3.418

4.434

4.393

3.665

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

-6.596***

3

4

0

8

Lleida

Lugo

Madrid

´
Malaga

-6.002***

-3.564***

-5.147***

2

Ourense

-4.420***

-3.539***

-5.055***

-5.262***

-4.923***

-3.801***

7

0

2

3

0

3

1

0

Pontevedra

Rioja, La

Salamanca

Santa Cruz de Tenerife

Segovia

Sevilla

Soria

Tarragona

-5.908***

-6.451***

1

0

0

1

Valencia

Valladolid

Zamora

Zaragoza

-7.648***

-4.421***

-4.922***

7

3

Teruel

Toledo

-3.453***

-2.825***

-2.664***

-2.821***

7

1

Palencia

Palmas, Las

-4.801***

3

0

Murcia

Navarra

-4.560***

-5.093***

3

´
Jaen

´
Leon

k

ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

No trend speciﬁcation

2

Table 4 continued

0.052

0.160

0.106

0.079

0.029

0.188

0.289*

0.078

0.231

0.358**

0.043

0.058

0.174

0.096

0.082

0.157

0.107

0.523**

0.102

0.087

0.074

0.042

0.088

0.268*

0.059

Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

0

0

0

1

3

7

0

1

3

0

8

2

0

7

3

7

7

0

3

8

0

4

3

3

2

k

-8.372***

-6.497***

-6.246***

-5.820***

-6.685***

-5.345***

-6.262***

-5.177***

-5.054***

-3.815***

-4.731***

-4.897***

-4.708***

-3.117**

-3.881***

-5.186***

-4.056***

-4.900***

-6.677***

-4.861***

-3.926***

-9.433***

-5.276***

-5.593***

-7.693***

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Trend speciﬁcation

0.034

0.072

0.065

0.044

0.029

0.074

0.101*

0.082

0.178**

0.186***

0.043

0.049

0.100*

0.064

0.085

0.115*

0.097

0.318***

0.076

0.075

0.051

0.020

0.089

0.101*

0.044

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

0.480

0.537

0.377

0.465

0.412

0.534

0.555

0.590

0.309

0.535

0.819

0.542

0.527

0.624

0.792

0.469

0.776

0.340

0.492

0.702

0.431

0.608

0.659

0.418

0.559

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

4.665

4.501

7.411

3.675

4.731

3.539

3.805

5.611

7.085

3.487

1.249

5.490

4.309

3.713

1.305

4.851

1.141

6.899

4.704

3.213

4.052

3.319

3.487

6.499

4.025

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

Lat Am Econ Rev (2016) 25:1

3.608***

Sc^
F

-8.448***

PMSBc

0.743

-3.430

1%

0.463

-2.860

5%

-3.231***

Pc
b

Critical values

-5.343***

Pc
a

52.003***

c
Ze
^

0.343

-2.570

10 %

N.A.

N.A.

k

Statistic

895.914***

0.098

0.122

0.185

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

-15.370***

s
Ze
^

PMSBs

-2.408

-4.722***

Ps
b

0.859***

Ss^
F

0.215

-3.960

1%

Critical values

-8.698***

Ps
a

56.280***

Ps
^
e

-2.314

-2.577

-3.167

ADFs^
F

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Trend speciﬁcation

0.149

-3.410

5%

N.A.

N.A.

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

0 .120

-3.120

10 %

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

The augmented autoregressions employed in the ADF analysis select the optimal lag-order with the t-sig criterion of Ng and Perron (1995), setting a maximum lag-order
equal to p ¼ 4ðT=100Þ1=4 . The stationarity tests are based on 12 lags of the Quadratic spectral kernel. The information criterion BIC3 has chosen an optimal rank equal to
1. Pe is distributed as v2 , with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values of 135.807, 124.342 and 118.498, respectively. Ze is distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values
^
^
100
equal to 2.326, 1.645 and 1.282, respectively. Pa , Pb and PMSB are distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values of -2.326, -1.645 and 1.282, respectively.
***, ** and * imply rejection of the null hypothesis at 1, 5 and 10 %, respectively

-2.022

ADFc^
F

0.235
835.432***

-1.620

10 %

0.324

0.536

Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

Pc
^
e

-1.950

5%

Common factor analysis

Bai and Ng (2010) pooled statistics

ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

1%

k

No trend speciﬁcation

Bai and Ng (2004a) pooled statistics

Critical values

Table 4 continued
period 1978.7–2014.4.
Again our aim is to discover the source of non-stationarity in Spanish provincial
inﬂation. In this case, the BIC3 procedure again selected only one common factor
and there is clear evidence of a unit root in the common factor, since the unit root
null is not rejected with the ADFc^ test and the stationarity null is strongly rejected
F
with the KPSSc^ statistic. This result carries over to the trend speciﬁcation.
F
We now proceed to test for a unit root in the idiosyncratic series. The evidence appears to
lend support to the stationarity of the idiosyncratic series even at the univariate level since
the unit root null is rejected with the ADF statistic for 49 provinces at the 1 % signiﬁcance
level and for one province at the 10 % level (Bizkaia). The application of the Shin statistic
yields conﬁrmatory evidence of stationarity for 41 provinces. For the rest (nine provinces),
the evidence appears inconclusive as the stationarity null is also rejected in this case (for 5 at
the 5 % signiﬁcance level and for 4 at the 10 %), as happened to the unit root null with the
ADF statistic.33 Regarding the stochastic properties of the idiosyncratic component for the
panel as a whole, it should be stressed that, as in the previous case, we are able to reject the
joint non-stationarity null hypothesis with the ﬁve pooled statistics at the 1 % level of
signiﬁcance, irrespective of the inclusion of deterministic trends in the speciﬁcations.
Therefore, also for this period overwhelming evidence of the joint stationarity of the
idiosyncratic component of the panel exists.
Columns 8 and 9 of Table 4 supply the aforementioned ratios of standard
deviations. The average values are now 0.52 and 4.22, respectively (they were 0.69
and 2.32 in the previous case). This change in those values points towards a higher
importance of the common component in this second period of our analysis, which
implies a stronger link among the provincial inﬂation rate series. This in turn
indicates that convergence among provincial inﬂation rate series has occurred to a
larger extent over the second period under study.
In sum, the panel tests applied to the idiosyncratic component support the joint
stationarity of the idiosyncratic series. This, combined with the presence of a nonstationary common factor, provides evidence of pairwise cointegration among the
provincial inﬂation rate series in both periods under scrutiny, and especially in the
second one. These results ﬁt in with prior studies about Spanish inﬂation persistence
and the hypothesis we aim to validate in this work regarding the inﬂation
convergence across Spanish provinces, particularly after the late 70s.34
33

The results are very similar for the trend speciﬁcation.

34

For robustness purposes, we explicitly incorporated the possibility of structural breaks into the
statistical analysis using the PANIC methodology by computing the three PANIC panel unit root tests
´
proposed by Bai and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2009), which allow for multiple structural breaks and common
factors. These tests include the Z test distributed as a lower-tailed standard normal distribution, the Fishertype Pm statistic distributed as an upper-tailed standard normal distribution and the Fisher-type P statistic
distributed as a v2 . In computing the three panel unit root tests, we allow for ﬁve common factors as well
2N
as for up to ﬁve mean shifts in the no-trend speciﬁcation and ﬁve mean and slope shifts in the trend
speciﬁcation. Irrespective of the inclusion of a trend in the speciﬁcation, the three panel unit root tests
(which take on a value of -5.963, 101.026 and 1528.72 for the no-trend speciﬁcation and -7.478,
114.825 and 1723.867 for the trend speciﬁcation, respectively) reject the joint unit root null hypothesis, in
favor of the stationarity of the idiosyncratic component. This is the same result we found when applying
As an alternative test of pairwise convergence to PANIC, we employ the pairwise
test developed by Pesaran (2007a). Pairwise convergence among the N(N - 1)/2
pairs (1225) of provincial inﬂation rates requires the existence of cointegrating
relations of the series involved of the form (1, -1). This corresponds to the presence
of stationarity for all possible pairs of inﬂation rates: dti;j ¼ pit À ptj , i = 1 … N - 1
and j = i ? 1 … N. Following Pesaran (2007a), we test whether all crossprovincial inﬂation differentials (pairs) are stationary with the ADF test and a
more powerful variant of the ADF statistic given by the weighted-symmetric (WS)
test proposed by Park and Fuller (1995) as well as the KPSS statistic. For the former
two tests, under the null of a unit root (i.e., non-convergence), the fraction of
inﬂation rate gap pairs for which the null hypothesis is rejected should converge to
the size of the unit root tests applied to individual inﬂation gap pairs, for N and
T ! 1. Hence, if there is rejection of the non-convergence null for a proportion of
the inﬂation gap pairs higher than any reasonable test size (e.g. 10 or 5 %), the
evidence would be favorable to convergence. Table 5 presents the results of the
fraction of rejections based on the 5 and 10 % nominal level tests for both periods
for the case of an intercept only and for a speciﬁcation with an intercept and a linear
trend. The results for the ADF and WS tests are calculated setting a maximum lag
order of eight, thereby choosing the optimal lag order with either the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) or the Schwarz Bayesian criterion (SBC). The results
for the KPSS statistic are calculated using a bandwidth that rounds 0:75 Â T 1=3 .35
As can be observed in Table 5, we ﬁnd evidence of a fraction of rejections close
to 1 for both periods with the ADF and WS unit root tests, irrespective of the
inclusion of a linear trend in the speciﬁcation. This indicates that all provincial
inﬂation rate pairs have converged to each other, thus conﬁrming the pairwise
convergence ﬁnding obtained with PANIC. However, according to the KPSS
stationarity test, the null of convergence is rejected for a fraction higher than the
nominal size, ranging from about 0.20 and 0.40. This would indicate the existence
of a lower proportion (than 1) of inﬂation rate pairs converging to each other. Given
the size distortions that the univariate KPSS test tends to exhibit, we base our
conclusions on the basis of the ADF and WS unit root tests, which point to the
existence of pairwise convergence in both periods.

6 Convergence analysis
6.1 Multivariate regression analysis
The PANIC analysis we have performed shows that, mainly in the second period,
there is convergence in the provincial inﬂation rates. Accordingly, digging deeper
into the information about convergence, in the supplementary appendix we provide
35
This analysis is conducted with GAUSS routines kindly provided by Hashem Pesaran at http://pesaran.
No trend speciﬁcation
CPI. 50 provinces.
1955.1–1978.6

Trend speciﬁcation
CPI. 50 provinces.
1978.7–2014.4

CPI. 50 provinces.
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces.
1978.7–2014.4

Fraction of rejections, based on 5 % nominal level tests
Lag order chosen with AIC
Average
lag-order

4.256

6.896

4.317

6.977

ADF test

0.985

0.999

0.952

0.995

WS test

0.999

0.993

0.985

0.974

Lag order chosen with SBC
Average
lag-order

1.345

2.508

1.324

2.536

ADF test

0.998

0.999

0.984

0.994

WS test

0.999

0.994

0.997

0.979

KPSS test

0.228

0.202

0.299

0.303

Fraction of rejections, based on 10 % nominal level tests
Lag order chosen with AIC
Average
lag-order

4.256

6.896

4.317

6.977

ADF test

0.997

1.000

0.979

0.998

WS test

1.000

0.994

0.995

0.984

Lag order chosen with SBC
Average
lag-order

1.345

2.508

1.324

2.536

ADF test

0.999

1.000

0.997

0.999

WS test

1.000

0.997

0.999

0.989

KPSS test

0.352

0.305

0.444

0.409

WS denotes the weighted-symmetric statistic of Park and Fuller (1995). AIC and SBC denote Akaike
information criterion and Schwarz Bayesian criterion, respectively. A maximum lag order of 8 is allowed
in the computation of the ADF and WS statistics. The bandwidth for the KPSS test is int ð0:75 Â T 1=3 Þ

results on how much the coefﬁcient of variation36 changes (in terms of percentage
of variation) from the start of each period up to its midpoint and from the beginning
of each period up to its end, for an ample group of relevant variables that include the
inﬂation rate and some of its potential determinants (the unemployment rate, two
proxies for the real average wage, two proxies for the labor share in the GVA,
nominal and real unit labor cost (ULC), real GVA per capita and real labor
productivity).37 A negative sign in the table means (sigma) convergence in the
36

In the case of the inﬂation rate, the information refers to the standard deviation.

37

The data are mainly based on De la Fuente (2010), Encuesta de Poblacion Activa (EPA)—
´
unemployment—and CPI (inﬂation). Globalization and some other institutional features like central bank
independence and sound ﬁscal policies are likely contributors to inﬂation convergence, but such
Weighted Standard Deviation

5

4

3

2

1

0

Fig. 2 Evolution of the standard deviation. Spanish provincial inﬂation rates. 1955.1–2014.4

variable involved, and a positive one just the opposite. It is quite visible that
widespread convergence in the variables occurs over time. It is also remarkable that
this convergence process is stronger throughout the second period (the real GVA per
capita being the only exception).38 Overall, the broad pattern of convergence is
illustrated in Fig. 2, particularly over the second period under scrutiny, thus
conﬁrming the results derived via PANIC analysis.
We next try to compare our study with that of Beck et al. (2009), an important
reference in this ﬁeld, which included the Spanish regions. However, the
comparison can be only partial, due to some differences in the characteristics of
our respective analyses. In our analysis, the dependent variable is the common
factor obtained from the PANIC analysis of Spanish provincial inﬂation and we will
use average national data as explanatory variables. Our series are expressed in time
series form and they are generally long. In Beck et al. (2009) the dependent variable
is regional inﬂation and they use the respective regional data as explanatory
variables. Their analysis is in cross-section form and they only study a short period
of time (1995–2004) for six European countries. They obtain their main conclusions
from mean regional relations.
For this comparison, we have compiled several proxies trying to follow Beck
et al. (2009)’s approach: (1) real ULC, as a way to capture the fact that different
regional developments in the price of labor (i.e., wages), potentially caused by
geographic labor market fragmentation, may lead to persistent inﬂation differentials.
(2) Inter-annual growth in the COICOP index ‘‘Housing, water, electricity, gas and
other fuels’’ (data source: Eurostat). It is a measure of costs of non-wage input
factors, whose geographic differences may stem from supply and demand changes
in segmented markets or structural inefﬁciencies in regulated markets (Beck et al.
2009). (3) Oil price inﬂation (dollars per barrel, data source: Reuters). It is also a
38
A widely known outcome for the Spanish economy: after some decades of convergence of this
variable, many years of unclear evolution followed. On the regional convergence of the Spanish economy
et al. (2009) but we consider its inclusion to be relevant for the Spanish case. (4)
The unemployment rate that accounts for a region’s position in the business cycle
and for the potential effect of labor market heterogeneity—caused by the geographic
segmentation of labor markets—on inﬂation differentials. (5) Ratio: number of local
units with three or more employees/population (in thousands). Data source:
Directorio Central de Empresas (DIRCE) and population ﬁgures, both from INE. It
is a measure of the market density in the manufacturing and wholesale sector (i.e.,
the number of suppliers), proxying for the competitive structure of a region, with a
higher value implying a greater degree of competition. As pointed out by Beck et al.
(2009), nominal rigidities are generally associated with imperfect competition in the
goods and labor markets leading to a high degree of inﬂation persistence, which can
be responsible for permanent inﬂation differentials. (6) Share of services in GVA at
basic prices (data source: Contabilidad Nacional Trimestral de Espana, INE). It is
˜
one of the proxies used by Beck et al. (2009) to capture the economic structure,
which can be the origin of asymmetric shocks and differences in the transmission of
such shocks. Cross-regional differences in economic structure are conducive to
asynchronous business cycle developments, which can at least have a transitory
effect on inﬂation differentials. (7) The growth rate of real GVA per capita, as a way
to capture the Balassa–Samuelson effect. Higher economic growth rates are
generally associated with a higher price level for non-tradable goods, and in turn a
higher overall price level. Hence, the price level will rise by a greater amount in
fast-growing provinces relative to slow-growing ones, thus causing inﬂation
differentials. In all, we have tried to follow as much as possible the spirit (and the
speciﬁcations) of their exercise—see mainly Beck et al. (2009, pp. 161, 162).
It is worth noting that, in comparison with bivariate analyses (common factor vs.
each one of the aforementioned variables), the multivariate regression presents two
main problems: (1) once you combine the different samples corresponding to the
different variables involved, the joint time period of analysis is shortened—mainly
due to the shorter samples of the additional variables following Beck et al. (2009)—,
with the results corresponding only to a part of our second period of analysis. (2)
The analysis faces severe potential multicollinearity problems—remember that in
some cases we work with different proxies for the same type of variable and in other
cases some of our variables embed or include other variables. Due to some problems
with the data and the econometric methods already pointed out, Beck et al. (2009)
only introduced a reduced group of variables in their multivariate analysis to explain
inﬂation (for all the countries of their study): unemployment rate, real ULC,
COICOP group index growth, competition proxy, percentage of services and real
GVA per capita growth. Of those variables, only three resulted signiﬁcant: COICOP
group index growth (?), competition proxy (-), and percentage of services (-).
In our case, for the Spanish economy, we have tried to replicate the structure of
that multivariate exercise, even playing in some cases with different proxies for the
same type of variable. In this sense, Table 6 provides robust signiﬁcant coefﬁcients
(1)

(2)

Unemployment rate

-0.138*** (-4.87)

-0.138*** (-4.85)

Real unit labor cost

6.868*** (8.23)

6.879*** (8.33)

COICOP group inﬂation rate

0.141* (1.80)

Oil inﬂation rate
Services share

0.0078** (2.03)
-0.065*** (-5.53)

-0.063*** (-5.46)

Market density

-0.361*** (-14.10)

-0.341*** (-16.40)

Real GVA per capita growth

-4.804*** (-6.66)

-5.231*** (-7.50)

Constant

7.518*** (9.05)

7.456*** (9.09)

F-statistic

176.80***

177.30***

R2

0.706

0.706

t-statistics are presented in parenthesis
***, ** and * imply statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcients at the 1, 5 and 10 % level, respectively

index growth (?), oil price inﬂation (?), competition proxy (-), services share in
GVA (-), and real GVA per capita growth (-).
Concerning labor market variables, both the unemployment rate and the real
ULC appear to explain the inﬂation rate. In the case of the unemployment rate, the
negative sign of its coefﬁcient appears to be consistent with the Phillips curve,
which accounts for the negative relation between the inﬂation and unemployment
rates.39 The signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient on the real ULC indicates the existence
of a positive relation between developments in the price of labor and persistent
developments in inﬂation. All this suggests that labor market institutions can affect
costs of production and in turn the inﬂation rate. The multivariate speciﬁcation also
offers consistent evidence of the positive impact that increases in non-wage input
factor prices (measured either through the growth in the COICOP index ‘‘Housing,
water, electricity, gas and other fuels’’ or the oil inﬂation rate) exert on the inﬂation
rate, thus reducing the degree of competitiveness of the Spanish economy. In
addition, market density, which proxies for the competitive structure of the Spanish
economy, appears to be inversely related to the inﬂation rate. This indicates that the
larger the number of suppliers and the higher the degree of competition, the lower
the inﬂation rate. In line with Beck et al. (2009) ﬁndings, the services share in GVA
is negatively associated with the inﬂation rate. This supports the fact that
asymmetric shocks caused by sectoral specialization can exert a temporary effect on
the inﬂation rate. Finally, the signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcient on the growth rate of
real GVA per capita runs counter to the positive sign predicted by the Balassa–
Samuelson hypothesis. This appears in line with other studies for European cities or
regions like Rogers (2007) and Beck et al. (2009), and with previous evidence for
Spain.
39
Although it should be pointed out that the evidence about the Spanish Phillips curve mainly indicates a
´
weak relation between inﬂation and unemployment—see for example the survey by Gomez and Usabiaga
An alternative explanation of the acute convergence path found in the provincial
inﬂation rates in the second time period could be ascribed to the fact that the
composition of the shopping basket in the Spanish provinces has tended to become
more homogeneous over time. This phenomenon can be approached by paying close
attention to the provincial weightings attached to the different groups of goods and
services the CPI comprises. In this particular analysis, we will thus heed the CPI
breaking down into twelve groups of goods and services—the so-called COICOP—,
although it could also be accomplished with a greater disaggregation—for the subgroups, which are in effect more than thirty.40
Unfortunately, lack of data availability prevents us from carrying out this
examination for the ﬁrst period. However, we can state something on that matter
regarding the second period, as we are able to compare the ﬁgures of the years 1992
and 2014—chronologically speaking, they are the ﬁrst year and the most recent one,
respectively, for which there are CPI weightings data available.41
For each COICOP group of goods and services (12) we will look into the
coefﬁcient of variation of its weightings across provinces (50). Thus, if this statistic
decreases over time (sigma convergence), it means that the different provinces are
allocating a more similar weighting to each speciﬁc group, which constitutes a neat
convergence process in the different provinces’ shopping basket. Given that this is a
relevant complementary exploration aimed at deriving robust outcomes from our
investigation, we deal with four kinds of standard deviation (unweighted, weighted
by provincial GDP, weighted by provincial employment and weighted by provincial
population). Table 7 provides the percentage change of each coefﬁcient of variation
between 1992 and the last year for which the calculation can be done. For this
reason, each negative sign in the table—reduction of the coefﬁcient of variation—
indicates (sigma) convergence. As can be easily seen, for all groups there is overall
evidence of convergence in the weightings assigned by the various provinces. Only
in the particular case of group 4 (Housing), for the coefﬁcient of variation obtained
through the GDP-weighted standard deviation, is convergence not observed. This is
not surprising since Housing constitutes a clear example of a non-tradable good, for
which convergence across provinces is more difﬁcult to realize relative to tradable
goods.
In short, during our second time period examined, it is shown that the Spanish
provinces’ shopping basket tends to converge in a clear way, which could help to
further account for the strong perceived convergence among the Spanish provincial
inﬂation rates.

40

Given the robustness of our results as regards COICOP groups, we have not deemed it necessary to
break down the data further into sub-groups.
41
Given that, in order to weight the standard deviation, we cross-check those CPI weightings with some
other variables’ data, all at a provincial level, the reference period will ﬁnally be 1992 vs. 2013 (and 2011
different Spanish provinces. Difference from 1992 (%)
With standard
deviation weighted
by provincial
employment. 2013

With standard
deviation weighted
by provincial
population. 2013

-4.76

-14.51

-15.12

-17.44

-11.74

-21.27

-22.67

-9.87

-6.00

-13.87

-15.62

Group

With
unweighted
standard
deviation.
2013

G1. Food and nonalcoholic beverages

-23.50

G2. Alcoholic
beverages and
tobacco
G3. Clothing and
footwear

With standard
deviation
weighted by
provincial GDP.
2011

G4. Housing

-28.74

?6.90

-10.11

-11.66

G5. Furnishings,
household equipment
and routine
maintenance of the
house

-29.82

-3.83

-19.41

-18.06

G6. Health

-33.32

-39.99

-47.13

-46.71

G7. Transport

-25.42

-9.25

-22.63

-22.89

G8. Communications

-55.44

-42.53

-53.49

-52.87

G9. Recreation and
culture

-22.91

-3.26

-13.87

-14.75

G10. Education

-28.03

-25.92

-28.81

-30.31

´
G11. Restaurants, cafes
and hotels

-23.65

-23.55

-35.27

-34.08

G12. Miscellaneous
goods and services

-50.10

-51.31

-54.45

-54.66

6.3 Testing the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis using Pesaran’s (2007a)
approach
As a ﬁnal exercise aimed at more formally determining the extent of convergence in
each of the 12 COICOP groups of goods and services across the 50 provinces
forming Spain, we apply the pairwise convergence approach of Pesaran (2007a) to
each of these groups of goods and services over the 1994.1–2015.11 period. This
exercise, in line with that conducted by Yilmazkuday (2013), constitutes an indirect
way to assess whether the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis holds across the Spanish
provinces over the period under scrutiny. If this hypothesis is to hold, convergence
among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates should be more prevalent in those groups
involving tradable goods, since cross-province trade would help eliminate inﬂation
differentials. In contrast, for those groups mainly composed of non-tradable goods
No trend speciﬁcation

Trend speciﬁcation

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

1.818

6.064

1.884

G1. Food and non-alcoholic beverages
Average lagorder

5.882

ADF test

0.980

0.968

0.912

0.843

WS test

0.990

0.996

0.951

0.921

2.228

6.395

2.305

G2. Alcoholic beverages and tobacco
Average lagorder

6.277

ADF test

0.992

0.976

0.961

0.897

WS test

0.987

0.989

0.966

0.934

3.320

6.979

3.251

G3. Clothing and footwear
Average lagorder

6.856

ADF test

0.873

0.923

0.845

0.885

WS test

0.878

0.918

0.838

0.889

4.929

1.608

5.219

1.624

G4. Housing
Average lagorder
ADF test

0.990

0.970

0.941

0.792

WS test

0.996

0.992

0.981

0.934

G5. Furnishings, household equipment and routine housing maintenance
Average lagorder

3.760

1.080

3.986

1.090

ADF test

0.994

0.999

0.967

0.985

WS test

0.999

1.000

0.989

0.998

5.050

1.456

5.526

1.487

G6. Health
Average lagorder
ADF test

0.996

0.983

0.968

0.889

WS test

0.998

0.996

0.993

0.948

3.958

1.464

4.104

1.489

G7. Transport
Average lagorder
ADF test

0.953

0.931

0.860

0.739

WS test

0.961

0.957

0.942

0.865

1.258

2.037

1.259

G8. Communications
Average lagorder

1.987

ADF test

0.584

0.603

0.451

0.476

WS test

0.745

0.770

0.500

No trend speciﬁcation

Trend speciﬁcation

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

1.331

3.773

1.314

G9. Recreation and culture
Average lagorder

3.679

ADF test

0.992

0.998

0.954

0.978

WS test

0.977

0.981

0.954

0.971

Average lagorder

3.009

1.308

3.198

1.300

ADF test

0.976

G10. Education

WS test

0.995
´
G11. Restaurants, cafes and hotels
Average lagorder

4.151

0.980

0.935

0.936

0.994

0.940

0.949

1.273

4.345

1.277

ADF test

0.987

0.999

0.947

0.962

WS test

0.984

0.993

0.938

0.948

1.376

4.461

1.408

G12. Miscellaneous goods and services
Average lagorder

4.230

ADF test

0.975

0.985

0.894

0.895

WS test

0.988

0.991

0.927

0.940

WS denotes the weighted-symmetric statistic of Park and Fuller (1995). AIC and SBC denote Akaike
information criterion and Schwarz Bayesian criterion, respectively. A maximum lag order of 8 is allowed
in the computation of the ADF and WS statistics. The fraction of rejections is based on 5 % nominal level
tests

expected. Hence, one would expect a higher degree of convergence for the
following groups involving tradable goods and services: food and non-alcoholic
beverages, alcoholic beverages and tobacco, clothing and footwear, and transport. A
lower degree of convergence is expected in those groups involving a mix of
tradables and non-tradables such as furnishings, household equipment and routine
housing maintenance, and recreation and culture; and an even lower degree of
convergence for those groups involving mainly non-tradables (in most cases
´
services) such as housing, health, communications, education, restaurants, cafes and
hotels, and miscellaneous goods and services.
As can be observed in Table 8, there is evidence of a fraction of rejections close
to 1 for all the COICOP groups of goods and services, with the exception of the
Communications group involving mainly non-tradables, which exhibits a fraction of
rejections of the null hypothesis of no convergence of about 0.60 for the case of the
ADF statistic and 0.75 for the case of the WS unit root test. These results are
generally robust to the inclusion of a linear trend in the speciﬁcation. Even though
we focus in the text on the results obtained when the fraction of rejections is based
provincial inﬂation rates is widespread across groups of goods and services, since
provincial inﬂation rate pairs have converged to each other for most of the groups,
irrespective of the tradables/non-tradables distinction. This conﬁrms the pairwise
convergence ﬁnding obtained for the aggregate provincial CPI-based inﬂation rates.
Aside from the ﬁnding supporting a lower extent of pairwise convergence for the
Communications group (involving mainly non-tradables), which would accord with
the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis, the bulk of the evidence does not allow us to
support the Balassa–Samuelson effect predicting important inﬂation differentials in
non-tradables (which would then be reﬂected in a relatively low fraction of
rejections for those COICOP groups involving non-tradables).

7 Conclusions
Our initial hypothesis has proven to be right. The behavior of the Spanish provincial
inﬂation rates differs between the two well-deﬁned periods of time explored, and
mainly a stronger convergence pattern is found over the second period. In this work
we list a large number of institutional, political and economic changes, both at
national and international levels, which might be behind that pattern change. Among
the international factors, we underscore the importance of globalization, intensiﬁed
through economic integration processes, and a well-managed monetary policy as the
most powerful causes prompting inﬂation convergence within Spain. We also ask
ourselves whether these forces have somehow played a role in bringing about the
same sort of convergence within Latin American countries. Our analysis leads us to
think that those countries that have pursued similar economic policies as the Spanish
ones are likely to have experienced sub-central inﬂation convergence as well. For
the sake of availability of data and empirical evidence, we have made some
comments on the Mexican and the Peruvian cases.
Overall, the PANIC analysis we develop, in addition to demonstrating the
notable persistence of Spanish inﬂation, ﬁts well with the expected results: higher
importance of the common component of the series in the second period analyzed
which links provincial inﬂation rate series together, thereby leading to strong
convergence. The evidence from the pairwise test of Pesaran appears to largely back
up these ﬁndings.
Besides inﬂation, we focus on a battery of economic and labor variables, mostly
by scrutinizing regional data, and conclude that they converge as well, mainly
throughout our second period of analysis—with the exception of the real GVA per
capita, which converges faster in the ﬁrst period. These variables’ convergence at
the geographic level is likely to have contributed to inﬂation’s convergence.
Delving deeper into that analysis, our multivariate analysis highlights the role of
unemployment, the costs of some non-wage input factors, the degree of competition
and the services share in GVA. All the signs found on the coefﬁcients are plausible,
in terms of the Phillips curve, the non-wage price pressure, the disinﬂationary
competition and sectoral specialization patterns—given the problems and rigidities
Balassa–Samuelson effect. A fundamental additional assessment undertaken, only
possible for the second period, as the necessary data start in 1992, centres on the
weightings given to the CPI’s groups of goods and services across Spanish
provinces. We arrive at a very robust outcome: those weightings clearly tend to
converge. That is, the shopping basket in the Spanish provinces has become more
homogenous over the second period of our analysis. Finally, when we disaggregate
provincial CPI-based inﬂation rates into province-level inﬂation rates of the 12
COICOP groups of goods and services, we ﬁnd that, with the exception of the
Communications group involving mainly non-tradables, all the other groups of
goods and services appear to exhibit a high degree of convergence among pairs of
inﬂation rates across provinces. This indicates that convergence in provincial
inﬂation rates is widespread across COICOP groups of goods and services,
irrespective of the tradables/non-tradables distinction.
All in all, a number of institutional, political and economic changes, which we
assume, based on economic theory and empirical observance, to have become more
intense since the late 70s, have caused a regime shift in the area under study, in the
form of a straightforward spatial convergence in the Spanish inﬂation rates. Our
work, besides capturing that phenomenon using several recent econometric
techniques, has also sought to account for this fact by assessing a number of
possible underlying factors. To sum up, in the second period studied we ﬁnd that the
idiosyncrasy of the different Spanish geographic units seems to become less
important. Our study paves the way for more speciﬁc approaches on the results and
potential underlying factors that our analysis has brought into light.
Lat Am Econ Rev (2016) 25:1
DOI 10.1007/s40503-016-0031-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH

The economic integration of Spain: a change
in the inﬂation pattern
´
´
Alejandro C. Garcıa-Cintado1 • Diego Romero-Avila1
1
Carlos Usabiaga

•

Received: 22 August 2015 / Accepted: 13 February 2016 / Published online: 2 March 2016
Ó The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract The behavior of Spanish inﬂation rates at the provincial level (consumption prices) differs over the two spans of time considered in our study
(1955.1–1978.6, 1978.7–2014.4). We point to a long list of institutional and economic changes, at national and international levels, as the potential factors that
might have led to this new pattern. In addition to conﬁrming the remarkable persistence shown by the Spanish inﬂation, the PANIC (panel analysis of non-stationarity in idiosyncratic and common components) analysis we undertake identiﬁes
a higher importance of the common component of the series in the second period
studied. Besides inﬂation, we draw attention to a battery of economic and labor
variables, mostly through regional data, and we conclude that they tend to converge
as well, particularly in the case of our second period of analysis. There are several
theoretical avenues whereby the geographic convergence of these variables and the
observed inﬂation convergence could be related. We also relate the common factor
in inﬂation obtained to some potential explanatory variables. Moreover, a relevant
additional analysis, which is only feasible for the second period, is implemented by
focusing on the weightings attributed to the different groups of goods and services
that make up the Consumer Price Index. The outcome we obtain is straightforward:
the shopping basket across Spanish provinces has tended to become more homogeneous. In summary, a variety of changes, which we regard as having increased
essentially since the late 70s, with the intensiﬁcation of the Spanish integration in
the core of European Union, among other factors, have brought about a regime shift

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s40503-016-00314) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
& Carlos Usabiaga
cusaiba@upo.es
1

that follow similar paths, for instance Latin American countries.
Keywords Inﬂation Á Economic integration Á Consumer prices Á Convergence Á
Persistence Á PANIC methodology
JEL Classiﬁcation

C23 Á E31 Á F15

1 Introduction
This article assesses the time evolution of a fundamental economic variable, the
inﬂation rate, for the case of the Spanish economy. More speciﬁcally, it focuses on
consumption prices from a geographically disaggregated (provincial) perspective
over two well-differentiated periods of time (1955.1–1978.6, 1978.7–2014.4). It is
worth noting that overall Spain is a country characterized by a mild inﬂation
differential relative to the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) core—
Caraballo and Usabiaga (2009c).1 The analysis of the time series properties of
province-level inﬂation rates in Spain and their convergence patterns is conducted
with PANIC (panel analysis of non-stationarity in idiosyncratic and common
components) as well as with the pairwise approach of Pesaran (2007a). From an
econometric point of view, these provincial data allow us to build panels with higher
N (50 provinces instead of 17 regions) and higher T, which is important for the
application of the PANIC methodology.2 The understanding of the behavior of
provincially disaggregated inﬂation rate series enables us to better understand the
evolution of aggregate inﬂation as well as to disentangle the importance of national
forces from province-speciﬁc factors in explaining inﬂation rate variability and in
identifying the sources of inﬂation heterogeneity. By focusing on a panel of
province-level inﬂation rates within the same country, the identiﬁcation of the
province-speciﬁc idiosyncratic component and the nationally driven common
component is also very important from a policy standpoint. Imagine, for instance,
that the analysis gives evidence that a province like Santa Cruz de Tenerife has a
strong and persistent idiosyncratic component and a weak common component. If
that is the case, this would imply that policy measures implemented at regional level

1

On the price-setting process in the Spanish economy, from different perspectives, we recommend the
´
´
numerous articles by Alvarez and coauthors. See, just as a sample Alvarez and Hernando (2006) and
´
Alvarez et al. (2010).
2
´
Romero-Avila and Usabiaga (2012) also use, among others, these provincial inﬂation series to study
´
inﬂation persistence. Unlike the present study that focuses on panel methods, Romero-Avila and Usabiaga
(2012) exclusively used univariate unit root tests (without considering breaks) and persistence measures
like the median-unbiased estimates of the persistence parameter and the half-life of a shock. Another
difference is that there, the authors studied not only provincial CPI-based inﬂation rates, but also
aggregate, regional, and group-level CPI-based inﬂation rates in addition to aggregate and sectoral
Producer Price Index (PPI)-based inﬂation rates. The evidence broadly supported the presence of a very
high level of persistence, which in many instances (particularly in the case of CPI-based inﬂation rates) is
In the current scenario of EMU, it is natural to expect provincial inﬂation rates to
be affected not only by external common shocks and national policies (e.g., ﬁscal
policies and labor and goods market reforms), but also by such supranational
policies as the common monetary policy. In that scenario, persistent inﬂation
differentials across provinces can be conducive to different provincial interest rates,
with clear implications on investment and aggregate demand. It is also appealing to
focus on Spanish province-level inﬂation since in a currency union inﬂation
differentials lead to realignments of the real exchange rate among provinces, which
have strong implications for the relative competitiveness of the different provinces
within the same country. The further disaggregation of province-level inﬂation rate
series into the inﬂation rates of the 12 COICOP groups of goods and services also
enables us to investigate the importance of the Balassa–Samuelson effect—and its
different predictions on the behavior of the prices of goods in the tradable and nontradable sectors—across the 50 provinces forming our sample.4 According to this
hypothesis, convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates should be more
prevalent in those groups involving tradable goods, since trade across provinces
would help eliminate the arbitrage opportunities. In contrast, there would be less
evidence of convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates for those groups
mainly composed of non-tradable goods and services. Whether regions with initially
low price levels converge to higher price levels via tradables or non-tradables is also
relevant for the degree of persistence of inﬂation differentials. If convergence
operates through tradables, its implications are probably transitory, whereas if
convergence works through non-tradables and the associated gradual process of
productivity convergence, the implications are likely to be long-lived (Rogers
2007).
Aside from the ﬁnding supporting a lower extent of pairwise convergence for the
Communications group (involving mainly non-tradables), which would accord with
the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis, the bulk of the evidence does not allow us to
3

Note that the statistical justiﬁcation for using PANIC goes hand in hand with the economic intuition of
the technique and the policy implications that one can derive from the results. The key is the
decomposition of the observed series into a common and idiosyncratic component, and in turn the
determination of their degree of integration, which enables us to establish whether idiosyncratic and/or
common shocks or policies can have transitory or permanent effects on inﬂation, depending on the degree
of integration of either component.

4

It is worth recalling that in this ﬁeld it is even customary to work with data from cities or municipalities.
In a well-known study, Rogers (2007) works with data of cities from Europe and the USA (1990–2004).
He highlights that there is a striking decline in dispersion for traded goods prices in Europe, most of
which took place prior to the launch of the euro. Still, this process has not yet signiﬁcantly affected the
cross-city ordering of price levels. That dispersion in the euro area would be now quite close to that of the
USA. Several potential factors responsible for the decline in dispersion in Europe are the harmonization
of tax rates, convergence of income and labor costs, liberalization of trade and factor markets, and
increased coherence of monetary policy. This study also concludes that the Balassa–Samuelson effect
does not explain much of the observed inﬂation rate differentials across European cities. Rogers (2001,
2007) point out that despite an on-going process of convergence, deviations from the ‘‘law of one price’’
are still large. Factors other than price convergence explain most of the cross-country inﬂation
non-tradables. The lessons that can be drawn from the results obtained for the
Spanish provinces are also relevant for other open economies, such as several in
Latin America, to the extent that they share with the Spanish economy some key
features as the degree of openness, central bank behavior, ﬁscal policy stance, etc.
The ﬁnding of widespread convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates for
both tradables and non-tradables implies that there may not be substantial regional
heterogeneities in the relative productivity growth of the tradable versus the nontradable sector. This is very relevant for many Latin American countries for which
real exchange rate ﬂuctuations affect economic activity due to their specialization in
commodity exports and their high dependence on imported capital goods. To the
extent that there is convergence in productivity levels, the price of non-tradable
goods also converges, and ﬂuctuations in the real exchange rate across sub-national
units thus fall. This would also make it easier for countries to access world ﬁnancial
markets in order to ﬁnance their trade imbalances, which helps smoothing
consumption. Taking now a national perspective for those Latin American countries
that peg their currencies to the dollar, their high volatility in productivity growth due
to their high dependence on production and exports of primary goods requires high
variability in domestic Consumer Price Index (CPI)-based inﬂation for the Balassa–
Samuelson hypothesis to hold.5 Hence, situations of slow growth caused by
recurrent adverse supply shocks impose equilibrium domestic inﬂation rates below
the US inﬂation rate. This can be achieved through a revaluation of the exchange
rate or through contractionary ﬁscal and monetary policies, which would further
harm growth and employment. These undesirable results could be prevented by
adopting a ﬂexible exchange rate regime, at the expense of the negative effects of
having higher variability in the nominal exchange rate.
The use of PANIC conveys several advantages over standard methodologies
employed to analyze convergence in inﬂation. First, it enables us to decompose the
observed inﬂation rate series into a common and an idiosyncratic component as well
as to determine the source of non-stationarity in the observed series, that is, whether
it stems from the common factor(s) and/or the idiosyncratic components. Second, by
allowing for common factors in the series, this technique controls for strong forms
of cross-sectional dependence in the data such as cross-cointegration, which is
essential to prevent severe size distortions in the tests—see O’Connell (1998),
Maddala and Wu (1999) and Banerjee et al. (2005). Third, this approach is
sufﬁciently ﬂexible as to allow for a different order of integration in both
components. Fourth, by encompassing both unit root and stationarity statistics that
shift their respective null hypotheses, this framework enables us to gather
conﬁrmatory evidence on the stochastic properties of inﬂation. Fifth and most
important, PANIC can be used as a cointegration framework without requiring the
choice of a reference province in the computation of the inﬂation gaps, i.e., the
series measuring the inﬂation differentials between two individual series. The
5

´
´
Drine and Rault (2003) and Garcıa-Solanes and Torrejon-Flores (2005) provide clear-cut evidence of
the empirical validity of the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis in Latin America only when panel
^
part explained by the common stochastic trends (^1 ) plus N À r1 cointegrating
r
vectors involving stationary linear combinations of the individual series forming the
panel. This provides information about the extent of convergence among the
inﬂation rate series. If the evidence favors a common stochastic trend together with
the existence of jointly stationary idiosyncratic series, there would be pairwise
cointegration (and convergence) among individual provincial inﬂation rates, which
would be driven by a non-stationary common factor linking all inﬂation rates over
time.
For robustness purposes, we use an alternative test of pairwise convergence
developed by Pesaran (2007a), which allows us to test whether all cross-provincial
inﬂation differentials (pairs) are stationary with several unit root and stationarity
tests. Like PANIC, this method does not require selecting a reference province in
the computation of the inﬂation differentials between two individual series, and as
such, it is not sensitive to this choice.
As already laid out, in our work we intend to shed some light upon whether there
has been a change in the pattern of behavior of Spanish inﬂation over the last
decades. In our analysis, a structural break is considered. In order to determine it
endogenously, we use the procedure proposed by Lee and Strazicich (2003, LS). For
the crash model the mean shift is located at July 1978. Instead of dealing with the
Spanish overall inﬂation rate directly, we address a major geographic disaggregation. Consequently, we make use of the 50 Spanish provinces’ inﬂation rates
(excluding the Autonomous Cities of Ceuta and Melilla due to the lack of consistent
data), which will compel us to employ panel data techniques (PANIC methods, in
our case), thereby allowing us to capture the econometric nature of the series under
study through their decomposition. Likewise, in the second part of our article our
focus will be more directed towards the topic of the spatial convergence of the
variable involved and its potential underlying factors—taking some relevant
economic and labor variables into account, in a ﬁrst step, and CPI weightings, in a
second one. By and large, our analysis will show, from different viewpoints, that
there has indeed existed a pattern change in that a more intense spatial convergence
in inﬂation rates has taken place in recent decades. It bears recalling that using
disaggregated data at a provincial level is not commonplace in this type of work and
it is indeed less usual than concentrating on regional data, thereby rendering our
results more original in this regard.
Overall, the PANIC analysis demonstrates not only the notable persistence of
Spanish inﬂation, but also the higher importance of the common component of the
series in the second period analyzed—which links provincial inﬂation rate series
together—thereby leading to strong convergence. The evidence from the pairwise
test of Pesaran (2007a) appears to largely back up these ﬁndings. Besides inﬂation,
we focus on a battery of economic and labor variables, mostly by scrutinizing
regional data, and conclude that they converge as well, mainly throughout our
second period of analysis—with the exception of the real gross value added (GVA)
per capita, which converges faster in the ﬁrst period.
The result of high inﬂation persistence in Spain should not be viewed as striking,
inertia—or implicit persistence—) seem to be quite deep-seated in the Spanish
economy. Thus, in this regard, the Spanish economy has long been plagued with a
myriad of different types of wage and price rigidities—which give rise to a low
sensitivity to the business cycle—, widespread indexation and a signiﬁcant
importance of backward-looking expectations, among other factors.6 Moreover,
Spain is regarded as being a highly service-oriented economy, which means that
labor costs account for an important fraction of total costs—the tertiary sector is
known to be a labor-intensive one. This fact manifests itself as a greater persistence
in ﬁnal prices, with respect to other sectors whose inputs prices are proven to be
more ﬂexible. Another Spanish economy’s predicament, to some extent shared with
other Southern European countries, lies in the barriers to competition in certain
sectors and product markets. Notwithstanding several reforms and statements such
as those associated with the strengthening of the Single Market, there is still
considerable room for improvement in this area in Spain, as there is limited
ﬂexibility in some prices. Take for instance the issue of the Spanish energy prices.
In essence, this dimension of our outcome (inﬂation persistence), which is brought
into light by our PANIC analysis reinforces the previous results in this area.
A ﬁnal exercise consists of a multivariate regression analysis aimed at
determining the factors responsible for Spanish inﬂation. In our view, given the
characteristics of the Spanish economy, all the signs from the multivariate analysis
are plausible, in terms of the Phillips curve, the non-wage price pressure, the
disinﬂationary competition and sectoral specialization patterns—given the problems
and rigidities of the goods and labor markets in Spain. Finally, the negative sign of
the coefﬁcient on real GVA per capita growth does not support the validity of the
Balassa–Samuelson effect.
The remainder of our article is structured as follows. Section 2 conducts a review
to further contextualize our work in the related literature. Section 3 presents the
PANIC approach. Section 4 makes a description of the inﬂation data employed and
analyzes the choice of the break considered. Section 5 comments on the results
obtained from the PANIC analysis and provides an alternative test of pairwise
convergence. Section 6 carries out an analysis utilizing some additional variables
other than inﬂation, also paying attention to CPI weightings and testing the Balassa–
Samuelson hypothesis. Finally, Sect. 7 concludes.

6

´
´
Galı and Lopez-Salido (2001), within the framework of the recent literature about the Phillips curve—
´
see Galı and Gertler (1999)—, emphasize the role of wage frictions and the backward-looking component
of inﬂation expectations. That second factor is also stressed by Fabiani et al. (2006). Restoy et al. (2005)
point to the problem of the Spanish dual inﬂation. Likewise, they highlight the relevant role of wage
´
indexation. Caraballo and Dabus (2013) and Caraballo and Usabiaga (2009a, b) present evidence for the
presence of menu costs—or other nominal rigidities—in the determination of Spanish consumer and
producer prices. The latter also focuses on the vulnerability of Spanish inﬂation to adverse oil shocks.
Finally, we should underline that the labor reforms undertaken between 2010 and 2012 (Bentolila et al.
2012), which supposedly have decreased workers’ and trade unions’ bargaining power, might have
affected those aforesaid labor variables (reducing wage indexation, removing, at least partially, the
2.1 Disinﬂation and inﬂation convergence: evidence and lessons for Latin
America
One geographic area that has long struggled to end high and chronic inﬂation is
Latin America. Latin American countries have endured bouts of high inﬂation and
hyperinﬂation in the recent past and some of them (mainly Venezuela and
Argentina) are currently grappling with this scourge again. For the remaining
countries, on a general basis inﬂation has come down from high numbers in the 70s,
80s and 90s to more moderate rates in the present decade. It is worth mentioning
that, in addition to opening themselves up to trade, countries like Mexico, Chile,
Peru, Colombia and Uruguay are known to have been quite successful in bringing to
birth a full-ﬂedged inﬂation-targeting regime.7 The inﬂation rates after the
implementation of the new framework plummeted in all these economies.8
Additionally, to be sustainable, this monetary arrangement calls for the conduct
of a more rigorous ﬁscal policy which may have also played some role in helping
drive inﬂation down over time.9 It is important to mention that the evidence mostly
points to the existence of a positive relation between the interplay of globalization
and monetary policy, via the incentives that the former raises for central banks to
behave prudently, and disinﬂation.
To our knowledge, the literature on the effects of the interaction of the
aforementioned factors on inﬂation convergence within countries is fairly scant,
especially in Latin America. Intuitively, a country’s regions, subject to the same
monetary policy and roughly similar structural reforms and ﬁscal policies, should in
principle experience long-run inﬂation convergence (Yilmazkuday 2013). Moreover, if, as a consequence of a further step taken toward a deeper economic and
monetary integration, some of these joint policies are carried out at a supranational
level, while others are inﬂuenced or restricted by common rules set at the same
level, a stronger sub-national inﬂation convergence is likely to occur, at least
throughout the initial stages of the process.
From a policy-oriented perspective, we view this analysis as relevant since nonnegligible differences in real interest rates could arise within the country did
regional inﬂation rates differ from each other, due for instance to distinct cyclical
positions across these regions’ economies, thereby perpetuating diverging economic
performances at regional level. Besides, persistent differences in inﬂation might
reﬂect permanent structural rigidities that prevent the regions hardest hit by shocks
from adjusting swiftly.
7

Brazil is another inﬂation targeter in the region, but we have elected to leave it out of our comments as
it is a relatively closed economy.

8

´
See Blake et al. (2015), for an application to Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, and Garcıa-Solanes
´
and Torrejon-Flores (2012), for the same countries plus Brazil.

9

To get a sense of how important ﬁscal discipline can be under an inﬂation-targeting regime, see
Mishkin (2000), for a general application to a set of emerging-market economies, Blanchard (2005), on
just chose because of data and empirical evidence availability. In the case of the
former, to the best of our knowledge, only studies on regional (relative) price
convergence can be found. Sonora (2005) tests whether the PPP hypothesis holds
across Mexico’s main cities. His results show that there is relative price
convergence in the long run. Furthermore, he also suggests that prices are relatively
ﬂexible, which runs counter to the slower long-run price convergence found for US
´
´
´
and Canadian data. Gomez-Aguirre and Rodrıguez-Chavez (2013a, b) also examine
price convergence across the main Mexican cities by employing panel data unit root
tests. Their ﬁndings in both papers coincide with Sonora’s: absolute price parity
holds in the long run. As far as inﬂation convergence is concerned, a quick
inspection of Mexican provincial inﬂation rate data (Instituto Nacional de
Estadıstica y Geografıa) provides a clue as to whether there has been regional/
´
´
provincial inﬂation convergence over time. A simple sigma-convergence analysis
leads us to think this has been the case. Mexico is a NAFTA member and is
therefore relatively integrated by commercial and ﬁnancial ties with the US and
Canada, and with the rest of the world as well. This relevant economic integration,
coupled with sound economic policies, in part due to the necessary consistency with
the status of being a more open economy, may have contributed to this regional/
local inﬂation convergence coming about over time.
´
On the Peruvian economy, Winkelried and Gutierrez (2012) show that the central
bank of Peru, by having targeted Lima’s inﬂation, has been in fact inﬂuencing the
economy-wide inﬂation,10 which in the end constitutes an indication that regional
inﬂation rates have converged over time. By means of a multivariate dynamic model
of inﬂation comprising the main nine regions in the country, they conclude that the
relative PPP holds among pairs of regional inﬂations. Again, Peru is an economy
whose recent progress on the macroeconomic and institutional front has been
remarkable. This virtuous cycle, in a way sparked by these aforementioned good
policies,11 has materialized itself in considerable economic growth rates and low
inﬂation.12 A steady convergence in regional inﬂation is an expected outcome given
the policies put in place from the 90s onwards.
As may be seen, the Spanish case that we choose to analyze in this article can be
generalized to other open economies, such as several in Latin America, to the extent
that these latter economies share certain characteristics with the Spanish economy
(degree of openness, central bank behavior, ﬁscal policy stance, etc.).

10
As the authors themselves say, Peru is a heavily centralized country, as Lima concentrates about a
third of the country’s population and used to represent more than 70 % of national expenditure.
11

Some economists assert that ‘‘good luck’’ seems to have played a greater role than good policies have
in causing Peru’s notable economic performance—see for example Mendoza (2013).
12
Although risks stemming from external shocks like the fall in commodity prices on international
markets and the foreseeable US monetary policy tightening, along with the fact that Peru is still a partially
After the view of the processes of disinﬂation and convergence in inﬂation in Latin
America, we are going to concentrate now on the Spanish case, logically placed
within the euro area context. The process of Spanish disinﬂation in the past decades
is well-known, and it has been widely studied using mainly the SVAR method´
ology—see the survey by Gomez and Usabiaga (2001).
As regards convergence, there exist several strands in the literature covering
price level convergence, inﬂation convergence and inﬂation differentials. Although
logically those literatures are closely related, each one of those research lines has
some economic and econometric speciﬁc features. On the inﬂation rates and their
convergence, main topic of our paper, there are more country-based case studies
than region-based ones. For instance, there is a lot of literature on this topic for
Western European countries. One can also ﬁnd abundant literature on the euro area
countries’ inﬂation differentials—see de Haan (2010) for a survey as well as several
ECB publications.
Although with slight caveats, related to the price indices, the time periods, or the
countries considered, in general, for the euro area countries inﬂation convergence
´
has been reported—see for instance Montuenga-Gomez (2002), Busetti et al. (2007)
and Beck et al. (2009)—, mainly before the mid-90s. However, there still exist
signiﬁcant and persistent inﬂation differentials in the euro area (de Haan 2010),
which even allow classifying countries under different categories or clusters—see
´
for instance Montuenga-Gomez (2002) and Busetti et al. (2007).
Beck et al. (2009, p. 153), with the euro zone in mind, present the following
classiﬁcation of the potential underlying factors in inﬂation differentials—de Haan
(2010) uses a roughly similar classiﬁcation—: (1) differences between the actual
positions of the economies within their business cycles, asymmetric shocks, and
asymmetric effects of area-wide impulses such as monetary impulses, exchange rate
movements or oil price changes. (2) The Balassa–Samuelson effect. (3) Inappropriate domestic policies or other unwarranted domestic developments such as
misaligned ﬁscal policies, immoderate wage evolution, or other production input
factor price developments. (4) Nominal wage and price rigidities. Beck et al. (2009)
point out that the most worrisome factors are those of the two last types.
There is no clear consensus on the speciﬁc underlying sources of the inﬂation
differentials among the euro area countries, although there may be a consensus
about the fact that they are rooted on structural or institutional factors—see for
instance Jaumotte and Morsy (2012) and Beck et al. (2009). In this respect,
Jaumotte and Morsy (2012), for a panel of 10 euro area countries (period
1983–2007), conclude that in order to reduce the persistent inﬂation differentials the
following labor elements have to be reformed: high employment protection,
intermediate coordination of collective bargaining and high union density. In this
line, de Haan (2010) highlights that most empirical research suggests that EMU has
not spurred labor market reform. However, Beck et al. (2009) do not emphasize the
labor factors for the regional euro area inﬂation differentials. In their opinion, those
differentials are mainly accounted for by the costs of the non-wage input factors, the
and region-speciﬁc structural characteristics. They also remark that there is
considerable heterogeneity in the economic structure of euro area regions such that
even symmetric impulses—such as a monetary policy shock—can have heterogeneous effects.
From the analysis of the regional inﬂation rates of the euro area countries, Beck
et al. (2009) state that national factors matter. Thus, the dispersion is higher among
the regions of all the European countries analyzed (Austria, Finland, Germany,
Italy, Norway and Spain) than among the regions of each country. In addition,
differences are substantially more pronounced across regions than across country
averages. These authors assert that the strong inﬂuence of the national factor very
likely stems both from nationally conducted ﬁscal policy and nationally determined
labor market institutions. In comparison to US regional inﬂation rates, the euro area
regional rates show a slightly higher degree of dispersion and persistence. Using a
factor model, Beck et al. (2009) ﬁnd that the variation in euro area regional inﬂation
rates is explained following these proportions: area-wide factors 50 %, national
factors 32 %, regional elements 18 % (Spain: national factors 26.8 %, regional
factors 24.6 %). They come to the conclusion that the Spanish differential in this
respect can probably be explained by the relatively high degree of independence
that Spanish regions enjoy.
Several works highlight that the monetary policy followed by EMU could have
generated convergence effects also at regional level, due to its effect on expectations
and other factors. For instance, Beck et al. (2009) state that the area-wide monetary
policy can considerably contribute to regional inﬂation stabilization even though it
cannot take regional developments into account when making its decisions. Apart
from Beck et al. (2009), other works also report regional inﬂation convergence. For
instance, Busetti et al. (2006) conduct an analysis of the price level and the inﬂation
rate for the monthly series of the CPI in 19 Italian regional capitals over the
1970–2003 period, concluding that the convergence process is stronger for the
inﬂation rate. Gozgor (2013) also observes convergence in Turkish regional
inﬂation rates (period 2004–2011).
Yilmazkuday (2013) tackles a more disaggregated analysis of regional inﬂation,
in the line of the works related to the Balassa–Samuelson literature. He works with
ten main CPI groups for each region, distinguishing between groups concentrated on
tradable and non-tradable components (period 1994–2004). In this study a break in
Turkish inﬂation is captured in 2002, and in 2001 for the cross-sectional standard
deviation of regional inﬂation rates. This author distinguishes between a preinﬂation targeting period and an inﬂation targeting period (which coincides with a
ﬂexible exchange rate) starting from January 2002. As in our study, Pesaran
(2007a)’s methodology is used, among other techniques—Arestis et al. (2014) also
use that technique, but applied to countries’ inﬂation. As acknowledged by
Yilmazkuday (2013), the results of this work require further study since during the
inﬂation targeting period the CPI groups with relatively tradable components have
diverged from each other, while the non-tradable groups have converged to each
other. Caraballo and Usabiaga (2009c) share some elements of the disaggregated
goods and services over the 1994–2015 period, we are able to uncover some
interesting patterns. With the exception of the Communications group involving
mainly non-tradables, all the other groups of goods and services appear to exhibit a
high degree of convergence among pairs of inﬂation rates across provinces. This
indicates that convergence in provincial inﬂation rates is widespread across groups
of goods and services, irrespective of the tradables/non-tradables distinction.
It is well accepted that the Balassa–Samuelson effect fails to account for the euro
area inﬂation dynamics—see ECB (2005), Rogers (2007) and Beck et al. (2009).
The Spanish economy is not an exception in this regard, maybe because some of its
assumptions do not hold in that economy; for instance features like a rather
centralized wage determination, a low labor mobility, etc. (Jimeno and Bentolila
´˜
1998), run counter to its central assumptions. Juselius and Ordonez (2009) point out
that the potential Balassa–Samuelson effect has more inﬂuence over the high
unemployment than over prices. Rabanal (2009) concludes that the Balassa–
Samuelson effect does not appear to be an important driver of the inﬂation
differential Spain-EMU during the EMU period, although a gap in labor
productivity between tradable and non-tradable sectors can be noted. In addition,
´
Alberola and Marques (2001) reject the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis at Spanish
regional level. Finally, in Beck et al. (2009) this theory is not supported for the
Spanish regions. To sum up, there is overwhelming evidence against the relevance
and explanatory power of that hypothesis for the Spanish economy. Our results do
not support the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis since there is not a signiﬁcantly
higher degree of convergence among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates for tradables,
relative to non-tradables (of course bearing in mind the exception of the
Communications sector). Likewise, our multivariate regression analysis provides
evidence of a signiﬁcantly negative impact of real GVA per capita growth on the
inﬂation rate, which runs counter to the positive effect that would be predicted
according to the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis.

3 PANIC approach
Different from most second-generation panel unit root tests that only allow for weak
forms of cross-sectional dependence (contemporaneous short-run cross-correlation),
some panel unit root tests relying on linear factor models can enable stronger forms
of cross-dependence such as cross-sectional cointegration. Among the panel
procedures that use a factor structure are Moon and Perron (2004), Pesaran (2007b)
and Bai and Ng (2004a, b, 2010). While Pesaran (2007b) just allows for one
common factor, Moon and Perron (2004) and Bai and Ng (2004a, b, 2010) allow for
multiple common factors. Nevertheless, only the panel tests of Bai and Ng (2004a,
b, 2010) are sufﬁciently general to allow for cointegration across units, which
entails that the observed series can include common stochastic trends. Actually,
under this framework the observed series is broken down into a common and an
case of cross-cointegration, the tests of Pesaran (2007b) and Moon and Perron
(2004) probably display size distortions, as the common trends may be confused
with the common factors and thus taken away from the data in the defactoring
process. Hence, the tests on the observed series seem to yield stationarity if the
remaining idiosyncratic component is stationary, in spite of the presence of nonstationary common factors.
Let us model the observed data on inﬂation rates (denoted by pit ) as the sum of a
deterministic part, a common component and an idiosyncratic error term:
pit ¼ Dit þ k0i Ft þ eit

ð1Þ

where ki is an r Â 1 vector of factor loadings, Ft is an r Â 1 vector of common
factors, and eit is the idiosyncratic component. Dit can contain a constant and a
linear trend. Since ki and Ft can only be estimated consistently when eit $ Ið0Þ, we
estimate a model in ﬁrst-differences like Dpit ¼ k0i ft þ zit , where zit ¼ Deit and
^
ft ¼ DFt .13 We next use principal components to estimate the common factors (ft ),
0^
^
^
z
the corresponding factor loadings (ki ) and the residuals (^it ¼ Dpit À ki ft ), so that we
preserve the order of integration of Ft and eit . As in Bai and Ng (2002), we normalize pit for each cross-section unit to have a unit variance. The common factors
P
P
^
^
^
and the residuals are then obtained as follows: Ft ¼ ts¼2 fs and eit ¼ ts¼2 zis ,
^
which can be used to test for a unit root in the common and idiosyncratic components, respectively.
3.1 Determining the number of common factors
Prior to testing for a unit root in the common and idiosyncratic components, we
make use of information criteria to set the number of common factors contained in
the panels of inﬂation rate series. We do so with the BIC3 information criterion:


ðN þ T À kÞ lnðNTÞ
^e
^e
ð2Þ
BIC3 ðkÞ ¼ r2 ðkÞ þ kr2 ðkmaxÞ
NT
^e
where k is the number of factors included in the model, r2 ðkÞ is the variance of the
^e
estimated idiosyncratic components, and r2 ðkmax Þ is the variance of the idiosyncratic components estimated with the maximum number of factors (kmax = 5).14
^
The optimal number of common factors (k) is chosen by applying
arg min0 k 5 BIC3 ðkÞ. The BIC3 is elected over other alternatives (like the ICp
information criteria) because for a general enough framework in which the
idiosyncratic errors can be serially correlated and cross-correlated, the BIC3
13
This representation amounts to the factor model with a constant. For the representation in the case of a
speciﬁcation with a trend, we refer to Bai and Ng (2004a, p. 1137).
14

The second argument in the loss function stands for the penalty for overﬁtting, which aims to correct
for the fact that models with a larger number of factors can at least ﬁt as good as models with fewer
common factors, but efﬁciency is reduced with the estimation of more factor loading parameters (Bai and
Perron (2007) point out that the BIC3 criterion performs better in selecting the
number of factors when min(N, T) is small.
3.2 Analysis of the idiosyncratic component
Before digging deeper into the methodology behind the PANIC approach, it is worth
noting that the unit root tests of Bai and Ng (2004a, 2010) and the stationarity tests
of Bai and Ng (2004b) have been combined, always within the PANIC framework,
as dictated in the original articles.15 Bai and Ng (2004a) estimate standard
Augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) speciﬁcations for a unit root in the idiosyncratic
components:
^
D^it ¼ di;0 ei;tÀ1 þ
e

pi
X

di;j D^i;tÀj þ uit
e

ð3Þ

j¼1

The ADF t-statistic for testing di;0 ¼ 0 is denoted by ADFc ðiÞ or ADFs ðiÞ for the
^
^
e
e
cases of only a constant and a constant and a linear trend in speciﬁcation (1),
respectively.16 To raise statistical power, Bai and Ng (2004a) deploy pooled
statistics based on the Fisher-type inverse Chi square tests of Maddala and Wu
(1999) and Choi (2001). Letting pc ðiÞ be the p-value associated with ADFc ðiÞ, the
^
e
^
e
pooled statistics are constructed as follows17:
Pc ¼ À2
^
e

N
X

d

log pc ðiÞ À x2
! ð2NÞ
^
e

for N fixed;

T!1

ð4Þ

i¼1

c
Ze
^

¼

À

PN

i¼1

log pc ðiÞ À N d
^
pﬃﬃﬃﬃ e
À Nð0; 1Þ for N;
!
N

T!1

ð5Þ

We also employ the two Moon and Perron (2004) type pooled tests utilizing the
PANIC residuals to estimate a bias-corrected pooled PANIC autoregressive
estimator, and a panel version of the Sargan–Bhargava (1983) statistic using the
sample moments of the residuals without the need to estimate the pooled
autoregressive coefﬁcients. A great advantage of the PANIC pooled statistics of

15
The use of unit root statistics (for the case of testing the unit root null hypothesis) along with
stationarity statistics (for the case of testing the stationarity null hypothesis) allows us to carry out a
conﬁrmatory analysis of the stochastic properties of the inﬂation rate series. See more details in Shin and
Snell (2006, p. 136).
16

The asymptotic distribution of ADFc ðiÞ is the same as the Dickey–Fuller distribution for the case of no
^
e
constant, while that of ADFs ðiÞ is proportional to the reciprocal of a Brownian bridge.
^
e
17
The same holds for the case of a trend, where ps ðiÞ is the p-value associated with ADFs ðiÞ. The pooled
^
e
e
^
s
statistics for the trend speciﬁcation are denoted as Ps and Ze . Note that we do not pool individual unit root
e
^
^
tests for the observed series, since under a factor structure the limiting distribution of the test would
^
contain terms that are common across units. However, ‘‘pooling of tests for eit is asymptotically valid
^
could give rise to a fall in statistical power.
3.3 Analysis of the common component
An ADF test is used to test for non-stationarity in the common factor. When the
panel only has one common factor, as it is our case, we estimate an ADF
b
speciﬁcation for F t with the same deterministic components as in model (1):
^
^
DFt ¼ Dt þ c0 FtÀ1 þ

p
X

^
cj DFtÀj þ vt

ð6Þ

j¼1

The corresponding ADF t-statistics are denoted by ADFc^ and ADFs^ and follow
F
F
the limiting distribution of the Dickey and Fuller (1979) test for the speciﬁcations
with only a constant, and a constant and a trend, respectively.
3.4 Stationarity tests for the common and idiosyncratic components
As noted above, the stationarity test of Kwiatkowski et al. (1992, KPSS) is used and
applied to both the common and idiosyncratic components following Bai and Ng
(2004b). The univariate KPSS tests for the idiosyncratic components are denoted by
Sc ðiÞ and Ss0 ðiÞ depending on whether trends appear or not in the speciﬁcation, and
^
^
e
e
the tests for the common factors are Sc^ and Ss^. The limiting distribution of Sc^ and
F
F
F
Ss^ are those derived by KPSS for the cases of a constant, and a constant and a linear
F
^
trend, respectively. However, the limiting distribution for testing eit depends on
^
whether Ft is I(0) or I(1). If all factors are I(0), Sc0 ðiÞ and Ss0 ðiÞ follow the
^
^
e
e
distribution of the KPSS tests for the cases of a constant, and a constant and a trend,
respectively. But if the factor is I(1), as it is our case, stationarity in the idiosyncratic
component implies cointegration between the observed series and the I(1) common
factor. In that case, we have to employ univariate cointegration tests denoted by
Sc1 ðiÞ and Ss1 ðiÞ, which have the limiting distribution of the cointegration test of
^
^
e
e
Shin (1994).
With respect to the computation of pooled statistics, when the common factors
are stationary, the p-values associated with the univariate KPSS tests for the
idiosyncratic components can be used to compute the pooled tests of Maddala and
Wu (1999) and Choi (2001). Otherwise, pooling is not valid since the nonstationarity of the common factors is transmitted to the residuals under the null
hypothesis of stationarity because it does not fade away even asymptotically.18

18
This analysis is conducted with MATLAB routines kindly provided by Serena Ng at http://www.
4.1 Data description
The main data we deploy in this article are CPI data,19 spanning from 1955.1 until
2014.4 at a monthly frequency, and they are sourced from INE (Instituto Nacional
de Estadıstica). We avail ourselves of year-on-year numbers so as to avoid the
´
seasonality problem. The data correspond to provincial capitals (up to 1992) and to
provinces themselves thereafter. Connecting both kinds of series, without manipulating them, proves unproblematic. We have only engaged in two very speciﬁc
manipulations of our inﬂation series in order to correct for two anomalous
ﬁgures related to the province of Zamora, in 1960.1 and 1961.1.20 In spite of having
access to previous years, we have decided to stick to 1955 as the ﬁrst year of our
study mainly for three reasons: (1) because we would not like to go too far back in
time, since our analysis neither aims to adopt an economic history approach nor to
deal with episodes too far back in history. (2) Because data might cease to be
statistically trustworthy as we move backwards in time, this trust being a
fundamental factor for the econometric analysis conducted. (3) Because for
additional assessments we make use of some other series, in addition to inﬂation,
which mostly start after 1955.
Our work’s basic data (inﬂation rate) is a panel made up of 50 (N, provinces) by
712 (T, months). Nevertheless, for our purposes, the aforesaid panel is split into two
different sub-samples. Indeed, in what follows, our article attempts to clarify
whether the behavior of the provincial inﬂation rate varies between sub-periods. But
before turning to the PANIC analysis, we next try to determine through econometric
techniques where the break is located, as a better alternative to exogenously
imposing it.
4.2 Determination of the endogenous break in inﬂation
In order to determine the most likely break in the provincial inﬂation rate series, we
need to ﬁnd the most likely common structural shift that is affecting all the series
simultaneously.21 The avenue we take for that is to test for structural instability in
the common stochastic trend that is driving all province-speciﬁc inﬂation rate series
over the whole period. To identify the break location we follow the procedure
proposed by Lee and Strazicich (2003). Unlike the Lumsdaine and Papell (1997)
unit root test which is derived assuming no breaks under the null hypothesis, the unit
root test of LS allows for breaks under both the null and alternative hypotheses. As
pointed out by LS, rejection of the null with the Lumsdaine and Papell (1997) test
only indicates rejection of a unit root without breaks, whereas the alternative does
19
Unfortunately, the existing data do not enable us to conduct an analysis of production prices akin to the
one implemented in this work.
20
Given that they were a very low value and a very high one, respectively, we have opted to give it the
second lowest value and the second highest value, respectively, as they were more suitable altogether.
21
´
Multiplier (LM) score principle, LS estimate the following regression:
~
Dpt ¼ d0 DZt þ /StÀ1 þ

k
X

~
ci DStÀi þ et

ð7Þ

1

~
~
~
~
where StÀ1 represents the detrended series such that St ¼ pt À wX À Zt d, for t = 2
~ is a vector of coefﬁcients estimated from the regression of Dpt on DZt and
… T. d
~
~
wX ¼ p1 À Z1 d, where p1 and Z1 are the ﬁrst observations of pt and Zt respectively,
and Zt is a vector of exogenous variables deﬁned by the data generation process of
the inﬂation rate series. The crash model allows for one shift in the intercept such
that Zt ¼ ½1; t; DU1t 0 .22 The mixed change model allows for one change in level and
slope, as given by Zt ¼ ½1; t; DU1t ; DT1t 0 .
The unit root null hypothesis is given by / ¼ 0 versus the alternative that /\0,
~
and the LM t-statistic is deﬁned by s (t-statistic testing the null hypothesis that
/ ¼ 0). The minimum LM unit root t-statistic determines the endogenous location
of the break (k ¼ TB =T) by using a grid search over all possible break points such
~
that LMs ¼ inf k sðkÞ. To correct for serial correlation, we control for a sufﬁciently
large number of augmentation terms (k) by employing the general to speciﬁc
approach proposed by Ng and Perron (1995), setting kmax = 12.23
For the crash model the mean shift is located at July 1978, whereas for the mixed
change model the shift in mean and slope appears located at April 1979. Given the
non-trending behavior exhibited by the inﬂation rate, we base our conclusions on
the crash model which points to the existence of a mean shift at July 1978. The
cross-province mean inﬂation rate for the ﬁrst regime equals 9.4 %, whereas it
equals 5.8 % for the post-break regime, implying a clear downward shift in the
mean inﬂation rate after the break took place. In addition, it is interesting to point
out that the value of the LM unit root test of LS for the crash and mixed change
models is -2.155 and -2.795, respectively, both values well below (in absolute
terms) the respective 10 % critical values (-3.504 and -4.989). This indicates the
existence of a unit root in the common factor for the whole period after accounting
for one structural break in the mean (and slope) of the series.
For robustness purposes, we also applied the generalized least squares (GLS)based unit root tests allowing for one break under both the null and alternative
´
hypotheses proposed by Carrion-i-Silvestre et al. (2009). These tests include the
class of modiﬁed tests (M tests), originally proposed by Stock (1999), and later
extended by Perron and Ng (1996) and Ng and Perron (2001). The latter apply local22
Our model allows for a structural break under the null and the alternative, thus controlling for a change
in level under the alternative and for a one-period jump under the null hypothesis.
23

To sum up, this approach presents several methodological advantages. First, the distribution of the tstatistic does not depend on nuisance parameters on the break location under the null. Second, the
minimum LM t-statistic allows for a break under the null and alternative, which avoids the possibility of
spurious rejections caused by size distortions (Lee and Strazicich 2001). Third, the location of the break
and the degree of augmentation are endogenously and jointly determined prior to the computation of the
LM unit root t-statistic. This analysis is conducted with GAUSS routines kindly provided by Junsoo Lee
the deterministic components of an ADF regression (see Elliot et al. 1996) so that
important gains in statistical power can be achieved. More speciﬁcally, we employ
the ADFGLS test ﬁrst proposed by Elliot et al. (1996), which is the t-statistic for
testing the existence of a unit root with a speciﬁcation where the underlying series is
detrended with GLS prior to estimation by OLS. The M GLS -class of tests includes
MZGLS and MZGLS which are modiﬁed versions of the Za and Zt Phillips and Perron
a
t
(1988) tests, MSBGLS which is a modiﬁed version of the Sargan and Bhargava
(1983) test, the feasible point optimal test ðPGLS Þ and the modiﬁed feasible point
T
optimal test ðMPGLS Þ.24 In this case, the break is located at August 1977, which is
T
very close to the break date identiﬁed with the LS procedure. Since a visual
inspection of Fig. 1 appears to favor a major downward shift in mean inﬂation in the
middle of 1978, we stick to the result obtained from the application of LS methods.
Still, it is reassuring that both methods render fairly similar results. Not surprisingly
either, none of the GLS-based unit root tests is able to reject the unit root null
hypothesis at conventional signiﬁcance levels,25 thus supporting the non-stationarity
of the common factor.
Our initial working hypothesis, which turns out to be conﬁrmed throughout our
analyses, is that from the break identiﬁed (1978.7) up to the present day a number of
relevant economic, political and institutional changes, both at the national and
international levels, have necessarily left their imprints on the inﬂation rate, among
other variables. This changing pattern is intended to be captured, in a ﬁrst step, via
PANIC, and in a second step, via other convergence assessments.
The break identiﬁed can be largely thought of as a turning point in Spanish
economic policy relative to Franco’s dictatorial regime, leading to a period of a high
reformist vigor brought about by the new democratic period that encompassed
almost every economic area, both within the country itself and further aﬁeld,
spurred by the ﬁrm intention of Spain to access to the European core. As regards
Spanish internal policy, which has been progressively constrained by the European
integration process, after the Pactos de la Moncloa (1977)—a battery of urgent
policy measures in response to the peak in inﬂation—, one of the ﬁrst measures
taken was the adoption of the medium-term economic program 1983–1986 (updated
twice afterwards). In this program, on the one hand, some adjustment policies were
put into place with the aim of correcting the main macroeconomic imbalances, and,
on the other hand, several structural reforms were fostered in order to better
articulate the productive fabric of the country and enhance the efﬁcient functioning

24

For these tests to exhibit good size properties, it is crucial to select the appropriate lag truncation (k) of
the ADF speciﬁcation. For that purpose, Ng and Perron (2001) develop the modiﬁed Akaike information
criterion which aims at selecting a relatively long lag-length in the presence of a large negative moving
average root (thus preventing size distortions) and a short lag-length when that root is not present (thus
avoiding unnecessary loss of power). In our application, we take a maximum lag truncation of 12. This
analysis is conducted with GAUSS routines kindly provided by Pierre Perron at http://people.bu.edu/
perron/code/Replication-codes-ET-2009.zip.

25


40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

Fig. 1 Evolution of Spanish provincial inﬂation rates. Inter-annual data. 1955.1–2014.4

of the markets.26 It is also indisputable that the initiatives in favor of the European
integration, and the legislative alignment that ensued from that, were crucial during
those years which ended with Spain entering the European Economic Community
(EEC) on January the 1st 1986. Within this process, the Maastricht Treaty called for
central banks’ independence of those countries aiming to join the Single Currency,
which in the case of Spain led to the approval of the Law of Autonomy of the Bank
of Spain (Law 13/1994). In the context of EMU, an inter-annual inﬂation target
around 2 % was established.27
In case the justiﬁcation of the timing of the break, based on institutional, political
and economic grounds, was deemed insufﬁcient, Fig. 1 plots the evolution of the
provincial inﬂation rates for both periods analyzed. Even at ﬁrst glance, it is easily
observable that the nature of the series appears to have undergone a transformation
between periods. Apart from a lower average inﬂation in the second period,28 even
in those months in which inﬂation is at similar levels across both periods, a lower
dispersion for the second one is perceived.
26
On the adjustment measures, in addition to a strong commitment to income policies, great importance
was placed on a restrictive monetary policy stance and on ﬁghting inﬂation. This economic strategy was
generally perceived to be the appropriate one at that time, following the second oil shock. As for the
structural reform package, during those years a multitude of measures were conducted, like the industrial
and energy restructuring, transformation of public enterprises, etc. We should also remember that the
Spanish labor market approached the way a genuine market is supposed to function essentially from the
break proposed onwards, right after trade unions were legalized in 1977, and the emergence of Workers’
Statute in 1980.
27

On the European integration process, from an economic perspective, see for example Baldwin and
Wyplosz (2013). From a regional point of view, see for example Cuadrado-Roura and Parellada (2002),
Fingleton (2003) and Maza and Villaverde (2011).
28
It should be remembered that there exists a strand of literature on the positive relation between average
5.1 Analysis of cross-sectional dependence
Before we implement the PANIC analysis, two cross-dependence tests are applied
to ascertain the likely existence of cross-correlation in inﬂation innovations for the
two panels of inﬂation rate series under scrutiny. These tests are those put forward
by Breusch and Pagan (1980) and Pesaran (2004). Pesaran’s test rests on the average
^
of pair-wise correlation coefﬁcients (qij ) of OLS residuals derived from standard
ADF regressions for each individual. The order of the autoregressive model is
selected using the t-sig criterion in Ng and Perron (1995), with the maximum
number of lags set at p ¼ 4ðT=100Þ1=4 . This test adopts the form
 d
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃPNÀ1 PN
^
qij À Nð0; 1Þ. The CD statistic tests the
CD ¼ 2T=ðNðN À 1ÞÞ
!
i¼1
j¼iþ1
null hypothesis of cross-sectional independence, is distributed as a two-tailed
standard normal distribution and exhibits good ﬁnite-sample properties. Moreover,
Breusch and Pagan (1980) test the null hypothesis of cross-sectionally independent
P
P
d
^2 ! 2
errors via the following LM statistic: CDlm ¼ T NÀ1 N
i¼1
j¼iþ1 qij À xNðNÀ1Þ=2 Þ.
Even though throughout the analysis all the outcomes for the speciﬁcation both with
and without trends are computed, as inﬂation is often portrayed as a variable of the
second type, we concentrate on the evidence obtained for the speciﬁcation with no
trends.29 For the two panels we are able to reject the null hypothesis of crosssectionally independent errors at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance with both the CD test
and the Breusch and Pagan LM test (Table 1). This in turn supports the use of
PANIC that allows for cross-sectional dependence so that large size distortions in
the tests are avoided—see O’Connell (1998), Maddala and Wu (1999) and Banerjee
et al. (2005).
5.1.1 Optimal number of common factors
Before testing for a unit root in the idiosyncratic series and common factors in
which the inﬂation rate series forming the two panels are broken down, the common
factors are estimated through principal components and the number of factors
present in the two panels investigated is then selected. Table 2 displays the results
from the application of the BIC3 criterion to the two panels of inﬂation series. This
criterion picks one common factor for the two panels. Since Bai and Ng (2002)
provided evidence that the BIC3 criterion performed remarkably well in the
presence of cross-correlations and Gengenbach et al. (2010, p. 134) offered
simulation evidence of the superior performance of the BIC3 criterion for shortN panels, and given the difﬁculty in establishing the number of common factors in
panels with relatively short N, we will undertake the decomposition of the inﬂation
rate series as if there existed one common factor, as speciﬁed by the BIC3 criterion.
29
As will become apparent below, the main results are fairly robust to the inclusion of a linear trend in
No trend speciﬁcation

Trend speciﬁcation

CPI. 50 provinces
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces
1978.7–2014.4

CPI. 50 provinces
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces
1978.7–2014.4

LM test

491.383a

2383.475a

488.076a

2390.468a

CD test

a

a

a

338.767a

152.845

338.290

152.327

The CD-statistic and the LM-statistic test for the null of cross-sectional independence. The CD-statistic is
distributed as a two-tailed standard normal distribution and the LM-statistic as a v2
NðNÀ1Þ=2 distribution
a

Implies rejection of the null hypothesis at the 1 % signiﬁcance level

Table 2 BIC3(k) information criterion
Number of factors (k)

CPI. 50 provinces
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces
1978.7–2014.4

0

3.1637

0.4657

1

2.5974a

0.2857a

2

2.8457

0.3059

3

3.1098

0.3279

4

3.3886

0.3515

5

3.6732

0.3781

a

Represents the lowest value of the information criteria. See the text for the equation associated with the
information criterion

5.2 PANIC analysis of the panel of CPI-based inﬂation rates for the Spanish
provinces
5.2.1 First period results
Table 3 presents the results of the univariate ADF and KPSS tests applied to the
idiosyncratic series, the respective univariate tests for the common factor as well as
the pooled statistics of Bai and Ng (2004a, 2010) for the panel of CPI-based
inﬂation rate series for the 50 Spanish provinces over the period 1955.1–1978.6. The
aim is to determine the source of non-stationarity in Spanish provincial inﬂation,
i.e., whether the common and/or idiosyncratic series are non-stationary. In this case,
the BIC3 procedure selected only one common factor.
Furthermore, as the univariate statistics applied to the common factor yield unclear
evidence as to whether the common component is stationary or not (since the ADFc^ and
F
ADFs^ statistics favor the stationarity hypothesis, whilst the KPSSc^ and KPSSs^
F
F
F
statistics lend support to the unit root hypothesis), we apply the IPC1, IPC2 and IPC3
information criteria of Bai (2004) as an alternative and more reliable methodology to
No trend speciﬁcation
ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

k

Trend speciﬁcation
Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

k

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

´
Alava

4

-3.969***

0.103

0

-3.990***

0.092

0.713

1.808

Albacete

0

-4.315***

0.282*

0

-4.611***

0.110*

0.621

2.513
2.728

Alicante

5

-4.327***

0.099

2

-4.582***

0.067

0.566

´
Almerıa

0

-3.904***

0.056

0

-4.115***

0.056

0.604

2.299

Asturias
´
Avila

0

-3.997***

0.072

0

-4.182***

0.068

0.704

2.018

0

-3.956***

0.102

0

-4.360***

0.101*

0.713

2.020

Badajoz

8

-4.871***

0.053

0

-4.879***

0.052

0.579

3.554

Balears, Illes

5

-3.026***

0.386**

5

-2.917**

0.190***

0.814

1.452

Barcelona

0

-3.631***

0.092

0

-3.801***

0.085

0.773

2.223

Bizkaia

1

-4.503***

0.187

1

-5.116***

0.072

0.734

2.348

Burgos
´
Caceres

1

-2.855***

0.199

1

-3.317***

0.047

0.790

2.568

5

-4.361***

0.284*

5

-4.368***

0.039

0.713

2.504

´
Cadiz

2

-4.048***

0.100

2

-4.089***

0.077

0.621

2.501

Cantabria
´
Castellon

0

-4.841***

0.113

0

-4.861***

0.065

0.796

1.747

2

-3.493***

0.403**

2

-3.781***

0.100*

0.647

1.758

Ciudad Real

0

-3.315***

0.226

0

-3.823***

0.064

0.793

1.429
2.678

´
Cordoba

0

-2.263**

0.245*

0

-3.055**

0.062

0.481

˜
Coruna, A

7

-3.194***

0.601***

7

-3.345***

0.194***

0.679

2.894

Cuenca

3

-3.709***

0.193

2

-4.115***

0.106*

0.476

2.903

Gipuzkoa

6

-4.536***

0.171

6

-4.670***

0.043

0.642

2.732

Girona

1

-3.995***

0.228

1

-4.087***

0.071

0.826

2.256

Granada

0

-4.153***

0.117

0

-4.306***

0.092

0.616

2.984

Guadalajara

1

-4.610***

0.073

1

-4.615***

0.056

0.699

2.496

Huelva

0

-4.262***

0.107

2

-4.252***

0.063

0.692

2.854

Huesca
´
Jaen

4

-3.838***

0.216

4

-4.414***

0.114*

0.689

2.441

0

-4.883***

0.068

0

-4.876***

0.054

0.639

2.371

´
Leon

2

-5.574***

0.142

2

-5.555***

0.052

0.583

2.646

Lleida

0

-3.462***

0.134

0

-3.565***

0.068

0.755

2.075

Lugo

0

-4.357***

0.043

0

-4.586***

0.027

0.706

2.334

Madrid

1

-3.878***

0.467**

1

-4.187***

0.209***

0.545

2.426

´
Malaga

0

-4.878***

0.276*

0

-4.877***

0.061

0.642

2.531

Murcia

3

-3.824***

0.051

0

-4.072***

0.037

0.478

3.477

Navarra

0

-3.068***

0.073

0

-3.605***

0.035

0.659

2.131

Ourense

5

-5.854***

0.039

5

-5.858***

0.025

0.745

2.371

Palencia

0

-4.587***

0.056

0

-4.587***

0.056

0.581

3.382

Palmas, Las

3

-2.388**

0.755***

3

-3.459***

0.072

0.879

1.259

Pontevedra

2

-3.528***

0.421**

2

-4.335***

0.026

0.742

2.182

Rioja, La

8

-3.044***

0.262*

5

-3.015**

0.121*

0.713

1.947

Salamanca

0

-4.158***

0.079

0

-4.174***

0.081

0.684

No trend speciﬁcation
ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

k

Trend speciﬁcation
Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

k

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

Santa Cruz
de
Tenerife

2

-3.187***

0.475**

2

-4.164***

0.057

0.947

0.607

Segovia

0

-4.200***

0.069

0

-4.299***

0.052

0.641

3.076

Sevilla

0

-4.951***

0.182

0

-4.991***

0.066

0.632

2.607

Soria

3

-2.820***

0.115

3

-2.792**

0.105*

0.725

2.173

Tarragona

3

-4.006***

0.097

0

-4.002***

0.096

0.645

3.100

Teruel

1

-3.876***

0.199

1

-4.062***

0.147**

0.778

2.225

Toledo

4

-3.443***

0.704***

4

-3.980***

0.062

0.816

1.779

Valencia

0

-5.692***

0.096

0

-5.747***

0.049

0.687

1.853

Valladolid

0

-3.199***

0.107

0

-3.241***

0.081

0.744

1.807

Zamora

0

-2.091**

0.139

0

-2.738**

0.129**

0.751

1.290

Zaragoza

1

-5.986***

0.036

1

-6.000***

0.035

0.581

3.021

Critical
values
1%

-2.580

0.536

-3.167

0.185

5%

-1.950

0.324

-2.577

0.122

10 %

-1.620

0.235

-2.314

0.098

Bai and Ng (2004a) pooled statistics
Pc
^
e

809.457***

N.A.

Ps
^
e

810.675***

N.A.

c
Ze
^

50.166***

N.A.

s
Ze
^

50.252***

N.A.

Bai and Ng (2010) pooled statistics
Pc
a

-70.372***

Ps
a

-51.347***

Pc
b

-17.300***

Ps
b

-18.592***

PMSBs

-6.358***

PMSBc
Common
factor
analysis

Statistic

ADFc^
F
Sc^
F

-4.972***
Critical values

Statistic

1%

5%

10 %

-2.783*

-3.430

-2.860

-2.570

ADFs^
F

1.185***

0.743

0.463

0.343

Ss^
F

Critical values
1%

5%

10 %

-3.427**

-3.960

-3.410

-3.120

0.371***

0.215

0.149

0.120

The augmented autoregressions employed in the ADF analysis select the optimal lag-order with the t-sig
criterion of Ng and Perron (1995), setting a maximum lag-order equal to p ¼ 4ðT=100Þ1=4 . The stationarity tests are based on 12 lags of the Quadratic spectral kernel. The information criterion BIC3 has
chosen an optimal rank equal to 1. Pe is distributed as v2 , with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values of 135.807,
^
100
124.342 and 118.498, respectively. Ze is distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values equal to
^
2.326, 1.645 and 1.282, respectively. Pa , Pb and PMSB are distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 %
critical values of -2.326, -1.645 and -1.282, respectively. ***, ** and * imply rejection of the null
only one common stochastic factor.30 Thus, if the common factor is found to be nonstationary, and the idiosyncratic components are I(0) stationary, there would be
evidence of pair-wise cointegration among the inﬂation rate series pertaining to the
panel.
We next turn to testing for a unit root in the idiosyncratic series. The evidence seems
to mostly favor stationarity of the idiosyncratic series even at the univariate level since
the unit root null is rejected with the ADF statistic for all the provincial series at the 1 %
´
level, except for three provinces (Cordoba, Las Palmas and Zamora) for which the null
is rejected at the 5 %. The application of the Shin statistic (as the presence of one nonstationary common factor kept us from using the KPSS test) renders conﬁrmatory
evidence of stationarity for 37 provinces. For the rest (13 provinces), the evidence
appears inconclusive as the stationarity null is also rejected in this case (for 3 provinces
at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance, 5 at the 5 % and 5 at the 10 %), as occurred with the
unit root null with the ADF statistic.31 To supply evidence of the stochastic properties of
the idiosyncratic component for the panel as a whole, we apply the pooled Fisher-type
inverse Chi square tests of Maddala and Wu (1999) and Choi (2001) along with the
PANIC pooled Moon–Perron and Sargan–Bhargava statistics. It is worth highlighting
that we are able to reject the joint non-stationarity null hypothesis with the ﬁve pooled
statistics at the 1 % level of signiﬁcance, regardless of the inclusion of deterministic
trends in the idiosyncratic series speciﬁcations. Hence, there is overwhelming evidence
of the joint stationarity of the idiosyncratic component of the panel under study.
Columns 8 and 9 of Table 3 show the ratio of the standard deviation of the
idiosyncratic component to the standard deviation of the observed data (both
expressed in ﬁrst-differences), and the ratio of the standard deviation of the common
component to the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic component respectively, to
get a sense of the relative importance of the common and idiosyncratic components.
The average values of those ratios are 0.69 and 2.32, respectively.32
Overall, the ﬁnding that the source of non-stationarity in the panel is a common
stochastic trend driving the non-stationarity in the observed series has become
apparent. Both this fact and the presence of a jointly stationary idiosyncratic
component combine to render evidence of pairwise cointegration among the
Spanish provincial inﬂation rate series.
5.2.2 Second period results
Table 4 presents the results of the univariate ADF and KPSS tests applied to the
idiosyncratic series, the respective univariate tests for the common factor as well as
30
Unlike the information criteria to determine the optimal number of common factors (stationary and
non-stationary) in Bai and Ng (2004a, b) that are applied to data in ﬁrst-differences, the IPCp panel
information criteria to determine the number of non-stationary common factors proposed by Bai (2004)
are applied to level data. In addition, the consistency of Bai (2004)’s information criteria requires the
idiosyncratic component to be I(0), which we will ﬁnd below to be the case.
31

These results are very similar for the trend speciﬁcation.

32

As laid out by Bai and Ng (2004b), if all variations are idiosyncratic, the ﬁrst ratio should take a value

0

8

Granada

Guadalajara

Huelva

Huesca

2

´
Castellon

8

7

Cantabria

Girona

5

´
Cadiz

2

1

´
Caceres

0

2

Burgos

Gipuzkoa

1

Bizkaia

Cuenca

0

Barcelona

1

5

Balears, Illes

˜
Coruna, A

0

Badajoz

0

1

8

4

Asturias
´
Avila

´
Cordoba

-5.079***

4

´
Almerıa

Ciudad Real

-2.763***

8

Alicante

-4.032***

-3.011***

-5.199***

-5.377***

-4.414***

-3.642***

-4.685***

-2.781***

-5.243***

-6.191***

-6.442***

-7.205***

-3.923***

-3.972***

-7.806***

-1.824*

-4.111***

-7.753***

-4.082***

-3.722***

-5.769***

-3.058***

7

Albacete

-4.337***

5

´
Alava

k

ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

No trend speciﬁcation

0.089

0.073

0.101

0.046

0.119

0.386**

0.101

0.122

0.186

0.283*

0.219

0.192

0.068

0.083

0.130

0.447**

0.420**

0.067

0.073

0.057

0.091

0.115

0.068

0.293*

0.148

Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

Table 4 PANIC analysis of CPI inﬂation. Spanish Provinces. 1978.7–2014.4

8

3

3

5

8

2

0

1

0

0

2

3

5

2

2

3

1

3

0

0

4

4

8

7

5

k

-5.438***

-4.153***

-5.132***

-5.370***

-4.848***

-6.034***

-6.507***

-4.841***

-5.127***

-6.725***

-6.403***

-7.666***

-4.791***

-4.041***

-8.060***

-2.959**

-4.638***

-8.751***

-4.335***

-5.082***

-3.964***

-4.311***

-5.884***

-4.592***

-5.455***

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Trend speciﬁcation

0.029

0.046

0.083

0.046

0.070

0.062

0.038

0.078

0.160**

0.089

0.062

0.124**

0.068

0.064

0.063

0.159**

0.166**

0.061

0.062

0.042

0.063

0.087

0.042

0.109*

0.057

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

0.615

0.423

0.455

0.476

0.426

0.616

0.346

0.619

0.375

0.478

0.591

0.412

0.531

0.485

0.529

0.503

0.538

0.521

0.426

0.556

0.498

0.607

0.425

0.478

0.523

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

3.869

4.205

4.684

4.820

5.012

2.587

3.451

2.706

4.572

4.737

4.561

4.703

5.720

3.707

5.359

3.543

4.125

4.964

4.715

3.218

2.880

3.418

4.434

4.393

3.665

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

-6.596***

3

4

0

8

Lleida

Lugo

Madrid

´
Malaga

-6.002***

-3.564***

-5.147***

2

Ourense

-4.420***

-3.539***

-5.055***

-5.262***

-4.923***

-3.801***

7

0

2

3

0

3

1

0

Pontevedra

Rioja, La

Salamanca

Santa Cruz de Tenerife

Segovia

Sevilla

Soria

Tarragona

-5.908***

-6.451***

1

0

0

1

Valencia

Valladolid

Zamora

Zaragoza

-7.648***

-4.421***

-4.922***

7

3

Teruel

Toledo

-3.453***

-2.825***

-2.664***

-2.821***

7

1

Palencia

Palmas, Las

-4.801***

3

0

Murcia

Navarra

-4.560***

-5.093***

3

´
Jaen

´
Leon

k

ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

No trend speciﬁcation

2

Table 4 continued

0.052

0.160

0.106

0.079

0.029

0.188

0.289*

0.078

0.231

0.358**

0.043

0.058

0.174

0.096

0.082

0.157

0.107

0.523**

0.102

0.087

0.074

0.042

0.088

0.268*

0.059

Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

0

0

0

1

3

7

0

1

3

0

8

2

0

7

3

7

7

0

3

8

0

4

3

3

2

k

-8.372***

-6.497***

-6.246***

-5.820***

-6.685***

-5.345***

-6.262***

-5.177***

-5.054***

-3.815***

-4.731***

-4.897***

-4.708***

-3.117**

-3.881***

-5.186***

-4.056***

-4.900***

-6.677***

-4.861***

-3.926***

-9.433***

-5.276***

-5.593***

-7.693***

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Trend speciﬁcation

0.034

0.072

0.065

0.044

0.029

0.074

0.101*

0.082

0.178**

0.186***

0.043

0.049

0.100*

0.064

0.085

0.115*

0.097

0.318***

0.076

0.075

0.051

0.020

0.089

0.101*

0.044

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

0.480

0.537

0.377

0.465

0.412

0.534

0.555

0.590

0.309

0.535

0.819

0.542

0.527

0.624

0.792

0.469

0.776

0.340

0.492

0.702

0.431

0.608

0.659

0.418

0.559

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

4.665

4.501

7.411

3.675

4.731

3.539

3.805

5.611

7.085

3.487

1.249

5.490

4.309

3.713

1.305

4.851

1.141

6.899

4.704

3.213

4.052

3.319

3.487

6.499

4.025

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

Lat Am Econ Rev (2016) 25:1

3.608***

Sc^
F

-8.448***

PMSBc

0.743

-3.430

1%

0.463

-2.860

5%

-3.231***

Pc
b

Critical values

-5.343***

Pc
a

52.003***

c
Ze
^

0.343

-2.570

10 %

N.A.

N.A.

k

Statistic

895.914***

0.098

0.122

0.185

Ss1 ðiÞ
^
e

-15.370***

s
Ze
^

PMSBs

-2.408

-4.722***

Ps
b

0.859***

Ss^
F

0.215

-3.960

1%

Critical values

-8.698***

Ps
a

56.280***

Ps
^
e

-2.314

-2.577

-3.167

ADFs^
F

ADFs ðiÞ
e
^

Trend speciﬁcation

0.149

-3.410

5%

N.A.

N.A.

rðDeit Þ
^
rðDpit Þ

0 .120

-3.120

10 %

rðk0i Ft Þ
^
rðeit Þ

The augmented autoregressions employed in the ADF analysis select the optimal lag-order with the t-sig criterion of Ng and Perron (1995), setting a maximum lag-order
equal to p ¼ 4ðT=100Þ1=4 . The stationarity tests are based on 12 lags of the Quadratic spectral kernel. The information criterion BIC3 has chosen an optimal rank equal to
1. Pe is distributed as v2 , with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values of 135.807, 124.342 and 118.498, respectively. Ze is distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values
^
^
100
equal to 2.326, 1.645 and 1.282, respectively. Pa , Pb and PMSB are distributed as N(0,1) with 1, 5 and 10 % critical values of -2.326, -1.645 and 1.282, respectively.
***, ** and * imply rejection of the null hypothesis at 1, 5 and 10 %, respectively

-2.022

ADFc^
F

0.235
835.432***

-1.620

10 %

0.324

0.536

Sc1 ðiÞ
^
e

Pc
^
e

-1.950

5%

Common factor analysis

Bai and Ng (2010) pooled statistics

ADFc ðiÞ
e
^

1%

k

No trend speciﬁcation

Bai and Ng (2004a) pooled statistics

Critical values

Table 4 continued
period 1978.7–2014.4.
Again our aim is to discover the source of non-stationarity in Spanish provincial
inﬂation. In this case, the BIC3 procedure again selected only one common factor
and there is clear evidence of a unit root in the common factor, since the unit root
null is not rejected with the ADFc^ test and the stationarity null is strongly rejected
F
with the KPSSc^ statistic. This result carries over to the trend speciﬁcation.
F
We now proceed to test for a unit root in the idiosyncratic series. The evidence appears to
lend support to the stationarity of the idiosyncratic series even at the univariate level since
the unit root null is rejected with the ADF statistic for 49 provinces at the 1 % signiﬁcance
level and for one province at the 10 % level (Bizkaia). The application of the Shin statistic
yields conﬁrmatory evidence of stationarity for 41 provinces. For the rest (nine provinces),
the evidence appears inconclusive as the stationarity null is also rejected in this case (for 5 at
the 5 % signiﬁcance level and for 4 at the 10 %), as happened to the unit root null with the
ADF statistic.33 Regarding the stochastic properties of the idiosyncratic component for the
panel as a whole, it should be stressed that, as in the previous case, we are able to reject the
joint non-stationarity null hypothesis with the ﬁve pooled statistics at the 1 % level of
signiﬁcance, irrespective of the inclusion of deterministic trends in the speciﬁcations.
Therefore, also for this period overwhelming evidence of the joint stationarity of the
idiosyncratic component of the panel exists.
Columns 8 and 9 of Table 4 supply the aforementioned ratios of standard
deviations. The average values are now 0.52 and 4.22, respectively (they were 0.69
and 2.32 in the previous case). This change in those values points towards a higher
importance of the common component in this second period of our analysis, which
implies a stronger link among the provincial inﬂation rate series. This in turn
indicates that convergence among provincial inﬂation rate series has occurred to a
larger extent over the second period under study.
In sum, the panel tests applied to the idiosyncratic component support the joint
stationarity of the idiosyncratic series. This, combined with the presence of a nonstationary common factor, provides evidence of pairwise cointegration among the
provincial inﬂation rate series in both periods under scrutiny, and especially in the
second one. These results ﬁt in with prior studies about Spanish inﬂation persistence
and the hypothesis we aim to validate in this work regarding the inﬂation
convergence across Spanish provinces, particularly after the late 70s.34
33

The results are very similar for the trend speciﬁcation.

34

For robustness purposes, we explicitly incorporated the possibility of structural breaks into the
statistical analysis using the PANIC methodology by computing the three PANIC panel unit root tests
´
proposed by Bai and Carrion-i-Silvestre (2009), which allow for multiple structural breaks and common
factors. These tests include the Z test distributed as a lower-tailed standard normal distribution, the Fishertype Pm statistic distributed as an upper-tailed standard normal distribution and the Fisher-type P statistic
distributed as a v2 . In computing the three panel unit root tests, we allow for ﬁve common factors as well
2N
as for up to ﬁve mean shifts in the no-trend speciﬁcation and ﬁve mean and slope shifts in the trend
speciﬁcation. Irrespective of the inclusion of a trend in the speciﬁcation, the three panel unit root tests
(which take on a value of -5.963, 101.026 and 1528.72 for the no-trend speciﬁcation and -7.478,
114.825 and 1723.867 for the trend speciﬁcation, respectively) reject the joint unit root null hypothesis, in
favor of the stationarity of the idiosyncratic component. This is the same result we found when applying
As an alternative test of pairwise convergence to PANIC, we employ the pairwise
test developed by Pesaran (2007a). Pairwise convergence among the N(N - 1)/2
pairs (1225) of provincial inﬂation rates requires the existence of cointegrating
relations of the series involved of the form (1, -1). This corresponds to the presence
of stationarity for all possible pairs of inﬂation rates: dti;j ¼ pit À ptj , i = 1 … N - 1
and j = i ? 1 … N. Following Pesaran (2007a), we test whether all crossprovincial inﬂation differentials (pairs) are stationary with the ADF test and a
more powerful variant of the ADF statistic given by the weighted-symmetric (WS)
test proposed by Park and Fuller (1995) as well as the KPSS statistic. For the former
two tests, under the null of a unit root (i.e., non-convergence), the fraction of
inﬂation rate gap pairs for which the null hypothesis is rejected should converge to
the size of the unit root tests applied to individual inﬂation gap pairs, for N and
T ! 1. Hence, if there is rejection of the non-convergence null for a proportion of
the inﬂation gap pairs higher than any reasonable test size (e.g. 10 or 5 %), the
evidence would be favorable to convergence. Table 5 presents the results of the
fraction of rejections based on the 5 and 10 % nominal level tests for both periods
for the case of an intercept only and for a speciﬁcation with an intercept and a linear
trend. The results for the ADF and WS tests are calculated setting a maximum lag
order of eight, thereby choosing the optimal lag order with either the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) or the Schwarz Bayesian criterion (SBC). The results
for the KPSS statistic are calculated using a bandwidth that rounds 0:75 Â T 1=3 .35
As can be observed in Table 5, we ﬁnd evidence of a fraction of rejections close
to 1 for both periods with the ADF and WS unit root tests, irrespective of the
inclusion of a linear trend in the speciﬁcation. This indicates that all provincial
inﬂation rate pairs have converged to each other, thus conﬁrming the pairwise
convergence ﬁnding obtained with PANIC. However, according to the KPSS
stationarity test, the null of convergence is rejected for a fraction higher than the
nominal size, ranging from about 0.20 and 0.40. This would indicate the existence
of a lower proportion (than 1) of inﬂation rate pairs converging to each other. Given
the size distortions that the univariate KPSS test tends to exhibit, we base our
conclusions on the basis of the ADF and WS unit root tests, which point to the
existence of pairwise convergence in both periods.

6 Convergence analysis
6.1 Multivariate regression analysis
The PANIC analysis we have performed shows that, mainly in the second period,
there is convergence in the provincial inﬂation rates. Accordingly, digging deeper
into the information about convergence, in the supplementary appendix we provide
35
This analysis is conducted with GAUSS routines kindly provided by Hashem Pesaran at http://pesaran.
No trend speciﬁcation
CPI. 50 provinces.
1955.1–1978.6

Trend speciﬁcation
CPI. 50 provinces.
1978.7–2014.4

CPI. 50 provinces.
1955.1–1978.6

CPI. 50 provinces.
1978.7–2014.4

Fraction of rejections, based on 5 % nominal level tests
Lag order chosen with AIC
Average
lag-order

4.256

6.896

4.317

6.977

ADF test

0.985

0.999

0.952

0.995

WS test

0.999

0.993

0.985

0.974

Lag order chosen with SBC
Average
lag-order

1.345

2.508

1.324

2.536

ADF test

0.998

0.999

0.984

0.994

WS test

0.999

0.994

0.997

0.979

KPSS test

0.228

0.202

0.299

0.303

Fraction of rejections, based on 10 % nominal level tests
Lag order chosen with AIC
Average
lag-order

4.256

6.896

4.317

6.977

ADF test

0.997

1.000

0.979

0.998

WS test

1.000

0.994

0.995

0.984

Lag order chosen with SBC
Average
lag-order

1.345

2.508

1.324

2.536

ADF test

0.999

1.000

0.997

0.999

WS test

1.000

0.997

0.999

0.989

KPSS test

0.352

0.305

0.444

0.409

WS denotes the weighted-symmetric statistic of Park and Fuller (1995). AIC and SBC denote Akaike
information criterion and Schwarz Bayesian criterion, respectively. A maximum lag order of 8 is allowed
in the computation of the ADF and WS statistics. The bandwidth for the KPSS test is int ð0:75 Â T 1=3 Þ

results on how much the coefﬁcient of variation36 changes (in terms of percentage
of variation) from the start of each period up to its midpoint and from the beginning
of each period up to its end, for an ample group of relevant variables that include the
inﬂation rate and some of its potential determinants (the unemployment rate, two
proxies for the real average wage, two proxies for the labor share in the GVA,
nominal and real unit labor cost (ULC), real GVA per capita and real labor
productivity).37 A negative sign in the table means (sigma) convergence in the
36

In the case of the inﬂation rate, the information refers to the standard deviation.

37

The data are mainly based on De la Fuente (2010), Encuesta de Poblacion Activa (EPA)—
´
unemployment—and CPI (inﬂation). Globalization and some other institutional features like central bank
independence and sound ﬁscal policies are likely contributors to inﬂation convergence, but such
Weighted Standard Deviation

5

4

3

2

1

0

Fig. 2 Evolution of the standard deviation. Spanish provincial inﬂation rates. 1955.1–2014.4

variable involved, and a positive one just the opposite. It is quite visible that
widespread convergence in the variables occurs over time. It is also remarkable that
this convergence process is stronger throughout the second period (the real GVA per
capita being the only exception).38 Overall, the broad pattern of convergence is
illustrated in Fig. 2, particularly over the second period under scrutiny, thus
conﬁrming the results derived via PANIC analysis.
We next try to compare our study with that of Beck et al. (2009), an important
reference in this ﬁeld, which included the Spanish regions. However, the
comparison can be only partial, due to some differences in the characteristics of
our respective analyses. In our analysis, the dependent variable is the common
factor obtained from the PANIC analysis of Spanish provincial inﬂation and we will
use average national data as explanatory variables. Our series are expressed in time
series form and they are generally long. In Beck et al. (2009) the dependent variable
is regional inﬂation and they use the respective regional data as explanatory
variables. Their analysis is in cross-section form and they only study a short period
of time (1995–2004) for six European countries. They obtain their main conclusions
from mean regional relations.
For this comparison, we have compiled several proxies trying to follow Beck
et al. (2009)’s approach: (1) real ULC, as a way to capture the fact that different
regional developments in the price of labor (i.e., wages), potentially caused by
geographic labor market fragmentation, may lead to persistent inﬂation differentials.
(2) Inter-annual growth in the COICOP index ‘‘Housing, water, electricity, gas and
other fuels’’ (data source: Eurostat). It is a measure of costs of non-wage input
factors, whose geographic differences may stem from supply and demand changes
in segmented markets or structural inefﬁciencies in regulated markets (Beck et al.
2009). (3) Oil price inﬂation (dollars per barrel, data source: Reuters). It is also a
38
A widely known outcome for the Spanish economy: after some decades of convergence of this
variable, many years of unclear evolution followed. On the regional convergence of the Spanish economy
et al. (2009) but we consider its inclusion to be relevant for the Spanish case. (4)
The unemployment rate that accounts for a region’s position in the business cycle
and for the potential effect of labor market heterogeneity—caused by the geographic
segmentation of labor markets—on inﬂation differentials. (5) Ratio: number of local
units with three or more employees/population (in thousands). Data source:
Directorio Central de Empresas (DIRCE) and population ﬁgures, both from INE. It
is a measure of the market density in the manufacturing and wholesale sector (i.e.,
the number of suppliers), proxying for the competitive structure of a region, with a
higher value implying a greater degree of competition. As pointed out by Beck et al.
(2009), nominal rigidities are generally associated with imperfect competition in the
goods and labor markets leading to a high degree of inﬂation persistence, which can
be responsible for permanent inﬂation differentials. (6) Share of services in GVA at
basic prices (data source: Contabilidad Nacional Trimestral de Espana, INE). It is
˜
one of the proxies used by Beck et al. (2009) to capture the economic structure,
which can be the origin of asymmetric shocks and differences in the transmission of
such shocks. Cross-regional differences in economic structure are conducive to
asynchronous business cycle developments, which can at least have a transitory
effect on inﬂation differentials. (7) The growth rate of real GVA per capita, as a way
to capture the Balassa–Samuelson effect. Higher economic growth rates are
generally associated with a higher price level for non-tradable goods, and in turn a
higher overall price level. Hence, the price level will rise by a greater amount in
fast-growing provinces relative to slow-growing ones, thus causing inﬂation
differentials. In all, we have tried to follow as much as possible the spirit (and the
speciﬁcations) of their exercise—see mainly Beck et al. (2009, pp. 161, 162).
It is worth noting that, in comparison with bivariate analyses (common factor vs.
each one of the aforementioned variables), the multivariate regression presents two
main problems: (1) once you combine the different samples corresponding to the
different variables involved, the joint time period of analysis is shortened—mainly
due to the shorter samples of the additional variables following Beck et al. (2009)—,
with the results corresponding only to a part of our second period of analysis. (2)
The analysis faces severe potential multicollinearity problems—remember that in
some cases we work with different proxies for the same type of variable and in other
cases some of our variables embed or include other variables. Due to some problems
with the data and the econometric methods already pointed out, Beck et al. (2009)
only introduced a reduced group of variables in their multivariate analysis to explain
inﬂation (for all the countries of their study): unemployment rate, real ULC,
COICOP group index growth, competition proxy, percentage of services and real
GVA per capita growth. Of those variables, only three resulted signiﬁcant: COICOP
group index growth (?), competition proxy (-), and percentage of services (-).
In our case, for the Spanish economy, we have tried to replicate the structure of
that multivariate exercise, even playing in some cases with different proxies for the
same type of variable. In this sense, Table 6 provides robust signiﬁcant coefﬁcients
(1)

(2)

Unemployment rate

-0.138*** (-4.87)

-0.138*** (-4.85)

Real unit labor cost

6.868*** (8.23)

6.879*** (8.33)

COICOP group inﬂation rate

0.141* (1.80)

Oil inﬂation rate
Services share

0.0078** (2.03)
-0.065*** (-5.53)

-0.063*** (-5.46)

Market density

-0.361*** (-14.10)

-0.341*** (-16.40)

Real GVA per capita growth

-4.804*** (-6.66)

-5.231*** (-7.50)

Constant

7.518*** (9.05)

7.456*** (9.09)

F-statistic

176.80***

177.30***

R2

0.706

0.706

t-statistics are presented in parenthesis
***, ** and * imply statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcients at the 1, 5 and 10 % level, respectively

index growth (?), oil price inﬂation (?), competition proxy (-), services share in
GVA (-), and real GVA per capita growth (-).
Concerning labor market variables, both the unemployment rate and the real
ULC appear to explain the inﬂation rate. In the case of the unemployment rate, the
negative sign of its coefﬁcient appears to be consistent with the Phillips curve,
which accounts for the negative relation between the inﬂation and unemployment
rates.39 The signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient on the real ULC indicates the existence
of a positive relation between developments in the price of labor and persistent
developments in inﬂation. All this suggests that labor market institutions can affect
costs of production and in turn the inﬂation rate. The multivariate speciﬁcation also
offers consistent evidence of the positive impact that increases in non-wage input
factor prices (measured either through the growth in the COICOP index ‘‘Housing,
water, electricity, gas and other fuels’’ or the oil inﬂation rate) exert on the inﬂation
rate, thus reducing the degree of competitiveness of the Spanish economy. In
addition, market density, which proxies for the competitive structure of the Spanish
economy, appears to be inversely related to the inﬂation rate. This indicates that the
larger the number of suppliers and the higher the degree of competition, the lower
the inﬂation rate. In line with Beck et al. (2009) ﬁndings, the services share in GVA
is negatively associated with the inﬂation rate. This supports the fact that
asymmetric shocks caused by sectoral specialization can exert a temporary effect on
the inﬂation rate. Finally, the signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcient on the growth rate of
real GVA per capita runs counter to the positive sign predicted by the Balassa–
Samuelson hypothesis. This appears in line with other studies for European cities or
regions like Rogers (2007) and Beck et al. (2009), and with previous evidence for
Spain.
39
Although it should be pointed out that the evidence about the Spanish Phillips curve mainly indicates a
´
weak relation between inﬂation and unemployment—see for example the survey by Gomez and Usabiaga
An alternative explanation of the acute convergence path found in the provincial
inﬂation rates in the second time period could be ascribed to the fact that the
composition of the shopping basket in the Spanish provinces has tended to become
more homogeneous over time. This phenomenon can be approached by paying close
attention to the provincial weightings attached to the different groups of goods and
services the CPI comprises. In this particular analysis, we will thus heed the CPI
breaking down into twelve groups of goods and services—the so-called COICOP—,
although it could also be accomplished with a greater disaggregation—for the subgroups, which are in effect more than thirty.40
Unfortunately, lack of data availability prevents us from carrying out this
examination for the ﬁrst period. However, we can state something on that matter
regarding the second period, as we are able to compare the ﬁgures of the years 1992
and 2014—chronologically speaking, they are the ﬁrst year and the most recent one,
respectively, for which there are CPI weightings data available.41
For each COICOP group of goods and services (12) we will look into the
coefﬁcient of variation of its weightings across provinces (50). Thus, if this statistic
decreases over time (sigma convergence), it means that the different provinces are
allocating a more similar weighting to each speciﬁc group, which constitutes a neat
convergence process in the different provinces’ shopping basket. Given that this is a
relevant complementary exploration aimed at deriving robust outcomes from our
investigation, we deal with four kinds of standard deviation (unweighted, weighted
by provincial GDP, weighted by provincial employment and weighted by provincial
population). Table 7 provides the percentage change of each coefﬁcient of variation
between 1992 and the last year for which the calculation can be done. For this
reason, each negative sign in the table—reduction of the coefﬁcient of variation—
indicates (sigma) convergence. As can be easily seen, for all groups there is overall
evidence of convergence in the weightings assigned by the various provinces. Only
in the particular case of group 4 (Housing), for the coefﬁcient of variation obtained
through the GDP-weighted standard deviation, is convergence not observed. This is
not surprising since Housing constitutes a clear example of a non-tradable good, for
which convergence across provinces is more difﬁcult to realize relative to tradable
goods.
In short, during our second time period examined, it is shown that the Spanish
provinces’ shopping basket tends to converge in a clear way, which could help to
further account for the strong perceived convergence among the Spanish provincial
inﬂation rates.

40

Given the robustness of our results as regards COICOP groups, we have not deemed it necessary to
break down the data further into sub-groups.
41
Given that, in order to weight the standard deviation, we cross-check those CPI weightings with some
other variables’ data, all at a provincial level, the reference period will ﬁnally be 1992 vs. 2013 (and 2011
different Spanish provinces. Difference from 1992 (%)
With standard
deviation weighted
by provincial
employment. 2013

With standard
deviation weighted
by provincial
population. 2013

-4.76

-14.51

-15.12

-17.44

-11.74

-21.27

-22.67

-9.87

-6.00

-13.87

-15.62

Group

With
unweighted
standard
deviation.
2013

G1. Food and nonalcoholic beverages

-23.50

G2. Alcoholic
beverages and
tobacco
G3. Clothing and
footwear

With standard
deviation
weighted by
provincial GDP.
2011

G4. Housing

-28.74

?6.90

-10.11

-11.66

G5. Furnishings,
household equipment
and routine
maintenance of the
house

-29.82

-3.83

-19.41

-18.06

G6. Health

-33.32

-39.99

-47.13

-46.71

G7. Transport

-25.42

-9.25

-22.63

-22.89

G8. Communications

-55.44

-42.53

-53.49

-52.87

G9. Recreation and
culture

-22.91

-3.26

-13.87

-14.75

G10. Education

-28.03

-25.92

-28.81

-30.31

´
G11. Restaurants, cafes
and hotels

-23.65

-23.55

-35.27

-34.08

G12. Miscellaneous
goods and services

-50.10

-51.31

-54.45

-54.66

6.3 Testing the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis using Pesaran’s (2007a)
approach
As a ﬁnal exercise aimed at more formally determining the extent of convergence in
each of the 12 COICOP groups of goods and services across the 50 provinces
forming Spain, we apply the pairwise convergence approach of Pesaran (2007a) to
each of these groups of goods and services over the 1994.1–2015.11 period. This
exercise, in line with that conducted by Yilmazkuday (2013), constitutes an indirect
way to assess whether the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis holds across the Spanish
provinces over the period under scrutiny. If this hypothesis is to hold, convergence
among pairs of provincial inﬂation rates should be more prevalent in those groups
involving tradable goods, since cross-province trade would help eliminate inﬂation
differentials. In contrast, for those groups mainly composed of non-tradable goods
No trend speciﬁcation

Trend speciﬁcation

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

1.818

6.064

1.884

G1. Food and non-alcoholic beverages
Average lagorder

5.882

ADF test

0.980

0.968

0.912

0.843

WS test

0.990

0.996

0.951

0.921

2.228

6.395

2.305

G2. Alcoholic beverages and tobacco
Average lagorder

6.277

ADF test

0.992

0.976

0.961

0.897

WS test

0.987

0.989

0.966

0.934

3.320

6.979

3.251

G3. Clothing and footwear
Average lagorder

6.856

ADF test

0.873

0.923

0.845

0.885

WS test

0.878

0.918

0.838

0.889

4.929

1.608

5.219

1.624

G4. Housing
Average lagorder
ADF test

0.990

0.970

0.941

0.792

WS test

0.996

0.992

0.981

0.934

G5. Furnishings, household equipment and routine housing maintenance
Average lagorder

3.760

1.080

3.986

1.090

ADF test

0.994

0.999

0.967

0.985

WS test

0.999

1.000

0.989

0.998

5.050

1.456

5.526

1.487

G6. Health
Average lagorder
ADF test

0.996

0.983

0.968

0.889

WS test

0.998

0.996

0.993

0.948

3.958

1.464

4.104

1.489

G7. Transport
Average lagorder
ADF test

0.953

0.931

0.860

0.739

WS test

0.961

0.957

0.942

0.865

1.258

2.037

1.259

G8. Communications
Average lagorder

1.987

ADF test

0.584

0.603

0.451

0.476

WS test

0.745

0.770

0.500

No trend speciﬁcation

Trend speciﬁcation

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

Lag order chosen
with AIC

Lag order chosen
with SBC

1.331

3.773

1.314

G9. Recreation and culture
Average lagorder

3.679

ADF test

0.992

0.998

0.954

0.978

WS test

0.977

0.981

0.954

0.971

Average lagorder

3.009

1.308

3.198

1.300

ADF test

0.976

G10. Education

WS test

0.995
´
G11. Restaurants, cafes and hotels
Average lagorder

4.151

0.980

0.935

0.936

0.994

0.940

0.949

1.273

4.345

1.277

ADF test

0.987

0.999

0.947

0.962

WS test

0.984

0.993

0.938

0.948

1.376

4.461

1.408

G12. Miscellaneous goods and services
Average lagorder

4.230

ADF test

0.975

0.985

0.894

0.895

WS test

0.988

0.991

0.927

0.940

WS denotes the weighted-symmetric statistic of Park and Fuller (1995). AIC and SBC denote Akaike
information criterion and Schwarz Bayesian criterion, respectively. A maximum lag order of 8 is allowed
in the computation of the ADF and WS statistics. The fraction of rejections is based on 5 % nominal level
tests

expected. Hence, one would expect a higher degree of convergence for the
following groups involving tradable goods and services: food and non-alcoholic
beverages, alcoholic beverages and tobacco, clothing and footwear, and transport. A
lower degree of convergence is expected in those groups involving a mix of
tradables and non-tradables such as furnishings, household equipment and routine
housing maintenance, and recreation and culture; and an even lower degree of
convergence for those groups involving mainly non-tradables (in most cases
´
services) such as housing, health, communications, education, restaurants, cafes and
hotels, and miscellaneous goods and services.
As can be observed in Table 8, there is evidence of a fraction of rejections close
to 1 for all the COICOP groups of goods and services, with the exception of the
Communications group involving mainly non-tradables, which exhibits a fraction of
rejections of the null hypothesis of no convergence of about 0.60 for the case of the
ADF statistic and 0.75 for the case of the WS unit root test. These results are
generally robust to the inclusion of a linear trend in the speciﬁcation. Even though
we focus in the text on the results obtained when the fraction of rejections is based
provincial inﬂation rates is widespread across groups of goods and services, since
provincial inﬂation rate pairs have converged to each other for most of the groups,
irrespective of the tradables/non-tradables distinction. This conﬁrms the pairwise
convergence ﬁnding obtained for the aggregate provincial CPI-based inﬂation rates.
Aside from the ﬁnding supporting a lower extent of pairwise convergence for the
Communications group (involving mainly non-tradables), which would accord with
the Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis, the bulk of the evidence does not allow us to
support the Balassa–Samuelson effect predicting important inﬂation differentials in
non-tradables (which would then be reﬂected in a relatively low fraction of
rejections for those COICOP groups involving non-tradables).

7 Conclusions
Our initial hypothesis has proven to be right. The behavior of the Spanish provincial
inﬂation rates differs between the two well-deﬁned periods of time explored, and
mainly a stronger convergence pattern is found over the second period. In this work
we list a large number of institutional, political and economic changes, both at
national and international levels, which might be behind that pattern change. Among
the international factors, we underscore the importance of globalization, intensiﬁed
through economic integration processes, and a well-managed monetary policy as the
most powerful causes prompting inﬂation convergence within Spain. We also ask
ourselves whether these forces have somehow played a role in bringing about the
same sort of convergence within Latin American countries. Our analysis leads us to
think that those countries that have pursued similar economic policies as the Spanish
ones are likely to have experienced sub-central inﬂation convergence as well. For
the sake of availability of data and empirical evidence, we have made some
comments on the Mexican and the Peruvian cases.
Overall, the PANIC analysis we develop, in addition to demonstrating the
notable persistence of Spanish inﬂation, ﬁts well with the expected results: higher
importance of the common component of the series in the second period analyzed
which links provincial inﬂation rate series together, thereby leading to strong
convergence. The evidence from the pairwise test of Pesaran appears to largely back
up these ﬁndings.
Besides inﬂation, we focus on a battery of economic and labor variables, mostly
by scrutinizing regional data, and conclude that they converge as well, mainly
throughout our second period of analysis—with the exception of the real GVA per
capita, which converges faster in the ﬁrst period. These variables’ convergence at
the geographic level is likely to have contributed to inﬂation’s convergence.
Delving deeper into that analysis, our multivariate analysis highlights the role of
unemployment, the costs of some non-wage input factors, the degree of competition
and the services share in GVA. All the signs found on the coefﬁcients are plausible,
in terms of the Phillips curve, the non-wage price pressure, the disinﬂationary
competition and sectoral specialization patterns—given the problems and rigidities
Balassa–Samuelson effect. A fundamental additional assessment undertaken, only
possible for the second period, as the necessary data start in 1992, centres on the
weightings given to the CPI’s groups of goods and services across Spanish
provinces. We arrive at a very robust outcome: those weightings clearly tend to
converge. That is, the shopping basket in the Spanish provinces has become more
homogenous over the second period of our analysis. Finally, when we disaggregate
provincial CPI-based inﬂation rates into province-level inﬂation rates of the 12
COICOP groups of goods and services, we ﬁnd that, with the exception of the
Communications group involving mainly non-tradables, all the other groups of
goods and services appear to exhibit a high degree of convergence among pairs of
inﬂation rates across provinces. This indicates that convergence in provincial
inﬂation rates is widespread across COICOP groups of goods and services,
irrespective of the tradables/non-tradables distinction.
All in all, a number of institutional, political and economic changes, which we
assume, based on economic theory and empirical observance, to have become more
intense since the late 70s, have caused a regime shift in the area under study, in the
form of a straightforward spatial convergence in the Spanish inﬂation rates. Our
work, besides capturing that phenomenon using several recent econometric
techniques, has also sought to account for this fact by assessing a number of
possible underlying factors. To sum up, in the second period studied we ﬁnd that the
idiosyncrasy of the different Spanish geographic units seems to become less
important. Our study paves the way for more speciﬁc approaches on the results and
potential underlying factors that our analysis has brought into light.
Acknowledgments The authors are particularly indebted to the Editors and the anonymous referees of
this Journal for valuable comments and suggestions that led to a substantial improvement of the original
´
´
manuscript. We also thank Stephen L. Parente, Julian Ramajo, J. Ignacio Silva, Ma Angeles Caraballo,
´
´
Diego Martınez, Daniel Oto-Peralıas, seminar participants at Pablo de Olavide University, and
participants at the 55th Congress of the European Regional Science Association (Lisbon) and INFER
Workshop on Applied Macroeconomics and Labour Economics (Seville), for valuable comments and
suggestions. The authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Technology under grant ECO2009-13357, the Spanish Ministry of Economics and Competitiveness under
grant ECO2012-35430, and the Andalusian Council of Innovation and Science under Excellence Project
SEJ-4546 and PAI SEJ-513.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

Yilmazkuday H (2013) Inﬂation targeting, ﬂexible exchange rates and inﬂation convergence. Appl Econ
