

Introduction



consequences, one of them being that more and more people possess and use these
devices. It can be observed that users replace their mobile phones and smartphones at
ever-shorter time intervals to benefit from the most recent attributes and features [30].
At the same time, the number of people owning mobile or smartphones has increased
over time. These aspects led to the fact that sales of these devices have grown and
grow exponentially over time, and the demand for (precious and critical) metals needed
for the production of mobile phones and smartphones steadily increased and will
increase. The increased material demand through larger sales numbers overcompensates
the material demand reductions through decreasing size and weight of mobile and
smartphones. This phenomenon is called the miniaturization paradox [34]. In general,
metals are classified as „critical” based on their geological scarcity and supply risks.
The supply risk depends on the economic and political stability of the manufacturing
countries, the production level, the possibility or substitution as well as recycling rates
[5]. At the same time, studies demonstrate that the highest environmental impact in the
lifecycle of mobile and smartphones comes from the mining of the metals contained in
these products together with the manufacturing of components (especially the mother
board which contains the precious and critical metals) and assembly of final products
[22]. As such, prolonging the use lifetime is expected to reduce the overall environmental burden of these products. Moreover, precious metals also have a high monetary
value, therefore it is expected that focusing on secondary supply can avoid primary
mining, leading in this way to a reduction in both production costs and environmental
burden. The prolongation of use lifetime of mobile and smartphones can be done via
upgrades, reuse, repair, remanufacture and recycling of the products as last solution to
keep the metals in a closed cycle.
End-of-life mobile and smartphones also constitute one of the fastest growing electrical and
electronic equipment waste streams in the world. At global level, around 14 billion mobile
phones were sold between 2004 and 2014, with, only in 2014 more than a billion mobile
phones, containing large amounts of critical and precious metals in their composition [14].
However, the short life cycle of these products combined with an inappropriate disposal at the
end-of-life stage lead to a major loss of these critical and precious metals and represents a
problem from both environmental and health issues point of view as this waste type contains
numerous hazardous materials [12]. The small size of these devices can explain why end-of-life
mobile and smartphones are easily stored at home, or, disposed of in the common household
waste instead of being properly recycled. For example, in Germany, the collection rate is with
around 5% very low [19]. The demand for many of the precious and strategic materials in these
devices is expected to rise further in the future. These demands originate from a further world
market growth of these devices and from the digitalization of further parts of economy and life.
At the same time, the supply of several of these materials may be at risk, due to limited primary
resources, concentration of supply and political risks. This makes the elaboration of technologies and concepts for a secondary materials supply an imperative research topic.
This paper attempts to contribute to this research by asking the following five
research questions:
Q1: What are the existing conditions for reuse/remanufacture and recycle mobile and

3

Q3: What stocks of precious and critical metals are contained in mobile phones and
smartphones in Germany?
Q4: What stocks of precious and critical metals are available as secondary stocks based
on existing collection, reuse/remanufacture and recycling rates in Germany?
Q5: What stocks and monetary value of stocks of precious and critical metals could be
kept in the cycle in Germany based on several scenarios of different collection and reuse/
remanufacture rates?
As a result, the present and future reuse/remanufacture potential for mobile phones and
smartphones and secondary stocks potential for precious and critical metals in mobile phones
and smartphones are explored for Germany.
Based on the literature review (sections two and three of the paper) and the above
mentioned research questions the present study further contributes to the gap of knowledge
in research in the following main aspects:

&

&

Identification of shortfalls and challenges of the European policy and regulatory framework for recovery and recycling of precious and critical metals in the context of circular
economy, including: i) in 2012, the amended WEEE Directive came into force containing
higher collection targets for WEEE. However, these are still set on the base of mass instead
of element / compound criticality or economic value based collection targets, resulting in
loss of precious and critical metals at end-of-life management of these product types due to
focus on heavy material content. ii) the transposition of the WEEE Directive in the EU led
to different national implementations with different types of producer responsibilities,
making it more challenging to achieve uniformity and quality in end-of-life management
of these products with focus on precious and critical metals. iii) the European WEEE
Directive assigns the responsibility of WEEE treatment to the producers, however, responsibility for who should be in charge of collection is not clearly defined, this leading in
many countries, including Germany, to low collection rates of small WEEE. iv) to date,
there is no uniform methodology existing for precious and critical materials inventory
present in small electronic products such as mobile and smartphones. Nevertheless, for a
successful and efficient end-of-life management system it is important to have a reliable
inventory of the potential existing stocks of products and the materials contained in
selected waste types and the current paper develops and discusses such a mathematical
model in the fourth and fifth parts of the paper.
Exploration and discussion of state of art, challenges and potential of remanufacturing
mobile and smartphones in Germany as a contribution factor to achieving circular economy of precious and critical metals in small WEEE. The paper is addressing these
challenges through an assessment of the potential for reuse/remanufacture and recycling
mobile and smartphones in Germany with a focus on keeping the precious and critical
metals stocks as a secondary source within the production cycle. The paper has demonstrated that there is a high potential for collecting such products for reuse/remanufacture
due to the saturated market in Germany, however, the infrastructure and incentives for
higher collection rates are still lacking.




and challenges of remanufacturing mobile and smartphones in Germany, being succeeded by
the development of the mathematical model for the assessment of the stocks of precious and
critical metals within mobile and smartphones. The mathematical model is then used for
simulating several scenarios based on incremental increasing collection and reuse/
remanufacture rates. Consequently, the results of the scenarios are analyzed and discussed
with reference to the proposed research questions, being followed by the conclusion of the
present study.

EU policy and regulatory framework for recovery and recycling of precious
and critical metals
Concepts for secondary supply of materials receive a lot of attention in research and
policy to address the growing demand for precious and strategic metals and materials.
However, to date, there is no uniform methodology existing for precious and critical
materials inventory present in small electronic products such as mobile and
smartphones. Regarding policy making, in the case of electronics, the WEEE Directive
(2002/96/EC) pursues the goal of achieving higher reuse/remanufacture, recycling and
recovery rates for waste electrical and electronic products. In 2012, the amended WEEE
Directive (2019/19/EU) came into force containing higher collection targets for WEEE
[2]. However, these are still set on the base of mass instead of element / compound
criticality or economic value based collection targets. Both the WEEE Directive and its
amended version WEEE II are based on the principle of producer responsibility (PR),
which is supposed to set incentives to producers for designing products that are easier
to reuse/remanufacture, disassemble, recycle and recover by attributing the financial
responsibility for collection, recovery and recycling to producers for their own products. The transposition of the WEEE Directive in the EU led to different national
implementations with different types of producer responsibilities. The main modifications brought by the new WEEE Directive will be implemented step-by-step until 2018
and include:

&
&
&
&
&

“Further increase of the collection and recovery rates in the different EU member states
Photovoltaic modules will now be covered by WEEE, i.e. they will have to be registered as
EEE at the Clearing House
By appointing authorized representatives in the countries the registration procedures
should become easier
The currently ten product categories will be reduced to only six in 2018
The “open scope” is introduced: All products which aren’t subject to any exception will be
under the scope of WEEE. Currently, products have to fit into one of the ten categories”.1

At the same time, the European Initiative Partnership (EIP) on Raw Materials focuses on
achieving innovations in recycling technologies and promotes the view of waste as valuable
source of secondary materials. Another strong concept in the direction of resource efficiency
and secondary materials is the circular economy concept which aims to ‘design out’ waste [21]
through upgrades, reuse, remanufacture and recycling (Fig. 1).

5
ClosedLoop

Recycle
Remanufacture
Repair
Reuse
Raw material
extraction

Manufacture

Usage

End-of-life

Open Loop

Disposal

Fig. 1 Circular view of the life cycle of a product. Source: self prepared as in [26]

Within the circular economy concept, remanufacturing is seen as a promising
solution towards declining materials depletion and energy consumption [33].
Remanufacturing is defined as “an industrial process by which used products are
repaired, replaced, or restored to like new conditions” [15]. Rathorea et al. [24] give a
similar definition: “remanufacturing is the process of bringing an assembly to a likenew condition through replacing and rebuilding component parts at least to their
current specification.” A more detailed definition is provided by Sundin [29] as in
Vogtlander et al. [33]: “during this process the core passes through a number of
remanufacturing steps, e.g. inspection, disassembly, part replacement/refurbishment,
cleaning, reassembly, and testing to ensure it meets the desired product standards”.
The original manufacturer theoretically performs the remanufacturing process based on
a combination of several decision factors including economic, environmental and
social aspects [11] (Fig. 2).
The European WEEE Directive assigns the responsibility of WEEE treatment to the
producers. However, responsibility for who should be in charge of collection is not
clearly defined. Remanufacturing is expected to “increase the utilization of recovered
materials or used and reconditioned components to reduce the raw material consumption and increasing the waste value” [36]. At the same time, remanufacturing is
aspiring to reduce manufacturing costs, reduce waste, reduce energy consumption
and emissions and therefore contribute to better environmental performance over the
life cycle of the products [18]. According to a LCA study from Fraunhofer Institute
on a Fairphone2,2 the motherboard causes the highest environmental impact, and this
is mainly due to the gold content used for the contacts in the connectors. As such, the
mentioned study analyses the effects of product modularity and lifetime extension
through several scenarios including reparability, remanufacturing and recycling, proving that designing the product in a modular way, has initially increased the material
footprint at the production level, however achieving better overall environmental
performance over the whole life cycle of the product [22]. However, looking at the
life cycle total energy consumption, it has been demonstrated that remanufacturing is
only beneficial if the lifespan of the remanufactured products is longer that the one of
2


Remanufacturing
Decision Factors

Economic

Remanufacturing
Value

Environmental

Process Cost

Product Value

Product Design

Business Value

Social

Environmental
Impact

Human Aspect

Legislative
Policy

Societal Aspect

Product Quality

Process
Efficiencies

Fig. 2 Remanufacturing decision factors. Source: [11]

their counterparts [23]. The current paper focuses on an analysis of the potential for
remanufacturing mobile and smartphones in Germany. As such, in the next section,
the first two research questions will be addressed:
Q1: What are the existing conditions for reuse/remanufacture and recycle mobile and
smartphones in Germany?
Q2: What challenges does remanufacturing of mobile and smartphones encounter in
Germany?

State of art and challenges of remanufacturing mobile and smartphones
in Germany
Q1: What are the existing conditions for reuse/remanufacture and recycle mobile and
smartphones in Germany?
According to the ElektroG (transposition of the WEEE Directive in Germany), the
collection system in Germany is centralized, meaning that it functions under the
responsibility of the municipalities. Since municipalities are the ones organizing and
collecting all brands of WEEE together, there is no chance for Individual Producer
Responsibility (IPR) to take place, where each producer is in charge of the end-oflife treatment of their own products. This is because treatment facilities cannot

7

systems (CPR) [12]. This implies at the same time that disposed mobile phones in
Germany do not reach the original manufacturer for remanufacturing. Manufacturers
could cooperate with retailer and repair shops that take back mobile phones from
consumers. However, much information on such activities could not be found for
Germany. For example, Apple is remanufacturing some of its products, but does not
offer remanufactured I-Phones to the European market [15]. Furthermore, in their
paper on rebound effects of circularity and remanufacturing, Zink & Geyer [35] state
that remanufactured mobile and smartphones from developed countries end up in
developing countries where people cannot afford new phones. This can imply that
remanufacturing in a developed country, such as Germany, would not have a
significant contribution to reducing new sales of new mobile and smartphones
[35]. According to [23], 65% end-of-life returned mobile phones within United
States and 50% in the United Kingdom are remanufactured or directly resold. Such
information could not be found for Germany, and as such, one goal of the current
study is to develop a methodology to calculate the inventory of mobile and
smartphones, which can potentially be gathered in Germany at end-of-life for reuse
and remanufacture purposes. The exploration of challenges of remanufacturing in
Germany, and the developed model to inventory the potential stocks of end-of-life
mobile and smartphones, can guide the policy makers one step further in deciding
whether remanufacturing of small electronic devices can be beneficial towards keeping
the metals for longer time in a circular loop. Furthermore, based on literature review,
official collection in Germany for mobile and smartphones is only 5%, out of which only
around 5% are reused (the present research assumes that remanufacturing is included in
this percentage). This is a very low value, and an accurate measure should be defined to
assess the size of the potential remanufacturing market for mobile and smartphones in
Germany as well as to assess the quality of the incoming products via the return
channels. Apart from low collection rates and no influence of the producers on the
pre-selection at the municipal collection points, other factors affecting remanufacturing
of mobile phones include:
i) The high level of uncertainty present within a remanufacturing system;
ii) The functionality level of the disposed mobile phones and;
iii) The uncertain customer demand for remanufactured mobile phones [11, 16].
Another constraining factor towards the implementation of remanufacturing is the high
labour costs for remanufacturing in comparison to the new mass-produced items [33].
Furthermore, the same study sees as beneficial to have remanufacturing done by third parties,
which can sell then the remanufactured product at a lower price and under a different brand.
This is because “the market niche of the remanufactured product (functional buyers who value
low costs above an expensive brand name) is totally different from the market niche of the
original product (wealthier technology freaks)”. This can also contribute to avoidance of
cannibalism of the original brand. On the other hand, costs are saved through the fact that
the extra marketing costs under the original brand name for the remanufactured product can be



Moreover, in the western world, the average use life of mobile phones and smartphones is
shorter than 18 months and around 100 new phone models are released yearly, implying that
also the remanufacturing process requires continuous adaptation to the new models released
[8]. One possible way of dealing with these issues is designing the product in a modular way.
One phone receiving a lot of attention, which is designed in a modular way, is the Fairphone,
and, as mentioned above, the LCA performed on the Fairphone2 model proved modularity to
lead to overall better environmental performance. Nonetheless, before decisions can be made
with regard to most efficient end-of-life management system for a specific waste type, it is
important to have a reliable inventory of the potential existing stocks of products and the
materials contained in selected waste types. This relates to the research questions iii) to v) of
the paper where a mathematical model is developed to calculate the stocks of mobile phones
and smartphones in Germany and the potential to keep them in a closed loop via reuse/
remanufacture and recycling.
According to Parajuly & Wenzel [21] the current collection activities are not optimal for
products reuse, since they often lead to physical damage of still functioning products. For a
proper separation of mobile and smartphones at their end-of-life (after first disposal), it is
important to develop programmes focused on the separate collection, pre-sorting and final
treatment of mobile and smartphones [7, 17, 20, 28]. Another influencing factor is customer
acceptance of reused/remanufactured phones, since prices of new phones are decreasing
yearly. According to Franke et al. [8], a potential market for reused/remanufactured phones
is represented by Asia and Latin America, since, in the developed countries, customer
acceptance is expected to be not too high. Policymaking is also an influencing factor for
reuse. However, the WEEE Directive (2012/19/EU) does not require any specific reuse targets.
Q2: What challenges does remanufacturing of mobile and smartphones encounter in
Germany?
Based on the current situation in Germany, the paper explores the opportunity to focus on
end-of-life management of these products towards proper collection, reuse/remanufacture and
recycling of precious and critical metals contained in them. Another aspect to be considered in
a future study is how many products at end-of-life still have reuse or remanufacturing potential
from a quality and functionality point of view. Referring to Germany, based on the identified
state of art with regard to remanufacturing mobile and smartphones, the biggest challenges
refer to uncertainties in the return rate in terms of quantity, quality, as well as customer attitudes
towards remanufactured mobile and smartphones. The first two are mainly influenced by the
fact that these small products are mixed with other WEEE during collection and transportation
to treatment facilities. The paper is addressing these challenges through an assessment of the
potential for reuse/remanufacture and recycling mobile and smartphones in Germany with a
focus on keeping the precious and critical metals stocks as a secondary source within the
production cycle. Germany has been chosen as an example for the present study since within
Europe it represents the country with highest e-waste generation [1].
Further, a mathematical model is developed to address the following research questions:
Q3: What stocks of precious and critical metals are contained in mobile phones and

9

Q5: What stocks and monetary value of stocks of precious and critical metals could be
kept in the cycle in Germany based on several scenarios of different collection and reuse/
remanufacture rates?

Methodology
A forecast of precious and critical metals stocks for the timeframe 2016–2035 is also modelled.
The model accounts for the different growth rates of sale of mobile phones and smartphones
respectively and for the differences in precious and critical metals contents.
The research design and methodology carried out in this study encompasses the following
steps. Firstly, research was carried out to retrieve sales of mobile phones and smartphones in
Germany during years 2004–2015 [3]. Additionally, estimates for the timeframe 2016–2035
were made with regard to future sales of mobile phones and smartphones in Germany using
the Bass Model. Let T denote the considered time horizon and t ∈ T the considered periods (i.e.
years). Next, by assuming a 2 years’ lifetime of mobile phones and smartphones, the amounts
of mobile phone and smartphone waste generated each year can be calculated. Thus, the
available “Reservoir” Rt for each year include the quantity of devices put on the market two
years before, i.e. Qt − 2 and the stocks St − 1 of mobile phone and smartphone waste which has
not been collected in the previous year (Eq. 1). The stocks in period t, in turn, result from the
reservoir Rt in this year minus the collected Ct and reused RRt amounts and plus the reused
amounts RRt − 1 from the year before (Eq. 2). The reservoir is available for collection in a
particular year.
Rt ¼ Qt−2 þ S t−1

ð1Þ

S t ¼ Rt −C t −RRt þ RRt−1

ð2Þ

Based on the available reservoir, the amounts Ct collected each year can be determined. The
amount of collected mobile phones and smartphones per year is calculated by multiplying the
collection rate ct of that year with the amount of available reservoir Rt (Eq. 3).
C t ¼ ct * R t

ð3Þ

Similary, the reused amounts RRt are calculated by multiplying the reuse rate rrt of a year
with the amounts Ct collected every year (Eq. 4). In the literature, it is assumed that reuse
activities may have a positive economic and environmental impact through the extension of
products use life [10]. As such, the current study is modelling several potential reuse/
remanufacture rates together with recycling to determine the potential for secondary supply
of precious and critical metals from an economic point of view.
RRt ¼ rrt * C t

ð4Þ

To obtain the total stock of precious and critical metals contained in mobile phones and



of precious and critical metals contained in mobile phones and smartphones; waste
collected, reused and amounts of metals recycled. This allows for the consideration of
different reuse/remanufacture rates in scenarios. Following, the potential monetary value
of the precious and critical metals content in mobile phones and smartphones as well as
monetary value not put to any use due to inefficiencies in the collection and recycling
process were calculated. Lastly, the potential monetary value of recycled materials
according to the different scenarios was calculated.3 The total monetary value MVi of
recycled precious and critical metals i from mobile phones and smartphones waste can be
calculated as follows (Eq. 5):
h
À
Á i
ð5Þ
MV i ¼ ∑T ct *rrt ðQt−2 þ S t−1 Þ ri^t mi^t−2 pi^t
t¼1
where,
ct
rrt
Qt
Ct
St
mit
pit
rit
i∈{1,…I}
t∈{1,…T}

collection rate in year [t]
reuse rate in year [t]
quantity of mobile phones sold in year [t]
collected amounts in year [t]
stock of waste mobile phones and smartphones in year [t]
amount of metal i per mobile phone or smartphone in year [t]
price of metal i in year t [€/t]
recycling rate of metal i in year [t]
Set of metal / compound used in the composition of mobile phone
or smartphone
time index with T = Planning horizon and t0 = 1: starting year

Analysis
In the next section, the methodology has been put into practice through the investigation of a
set of proposed scenarios. First data collection and calculation was performed, being followed
by scenarios analysis and results interpretation.

Data collection and calculation
Several scenarios were modelled with regard to the collection and reuse rates: a) based on a
literature review, the existing collection and reuse rates in Germany for mobile phone and
smartphone waste were identified; b) two further scenarios were modelled based on the
assumption that the collection and reuse rates are increasing in the midterm and long term
respectively.
Q3: What stocks of precious and critical metals are contained in mobile phones and
smartphones in Germany?

11

Further, a literature review was performed to determine the content of precious and critical
metals in mobile phones and smartphones [9, 32]. This information is required for the
calculation of the total amounts of precious and critical metals contained in mobile phones
and smartphones sold in Germany during the analyzed timeframe.
Based on the raw material composition of mobile phones [9, 32] and smartphones [19], and
according to the list of critical metals issued by the European Commission [6], the following
twelve precious and critical metals were selected for further analysis in this paper: Gold, Silver,
Palladium, Cobalt, Gallium, Indium, Chromium, Magnesium, Antimony, Beryllium, Praseodymium and Neodymium (Table 1). Copper is also taken into account, due to its high content in
the composition of both mobile phones and smartphones and due to the fact that precious
metals can only be recycled in high grades in integrated copper smelters [13].
Analyzing the precious and critical metal content of mobile phones and smartphones, it can
be noted that a larger number and amount of precious and critical metals is used in mobile
phones in comparison to smartphones. The content of gold is similar in both devices, while
smartphones have a lower content of silver and palladium than mobile phones. Since these
metals have the highest monetary value within the two types of devices, it might be stated that
the economic value of recycling smartphones is lower, due to decreasing content of high value
metals within the device. However, the increase of sales in smartphones, which is anticipated
to continue in the future, is expected to overcompensate the reduction in precious and critical
metals content of smartphones and, hence, the demand for these metals is expected to continue
to increase, phenomenon called the miniaturization paradox.
Data on sales amounts for Germany could be retrieved for the timeframe 2004–2015.
During this period, approx. 162 million mobile phones (161,962,000) and more than 115
million smartphones (115,171,000) have been sold in Germany. According to Figs. 3 and 4, it
can be observed that the market for mobile phones grew at a fast rate until the peak year 2007
(24 million sold units), being followed by decreasing sales in following years. In 2015, only
2.2 million mobile phones were sold. This decline was caused by the market introduction and
fast dissemination of smartphones, which had a continuous increasing annual growth in sales
(Table 1).

Units put on the market

30000000

2004 - 2015

25000000
20000000
15000000
Mobile Phones

10000000

Smartphones

5000000
0
metal content in total
put on the market (t)

36.48
0.45
14.5
0.02004
0.2459
0.40073
0.0042
0.00163
0.00209
0.01002
6.52904
0.07741
0.05464

4.78
81.79
14.58
615.46
0.15
1.00
2427.81
74.50
1.886.05
0.49
0.32

5,106.93

0.0295
0.505
0.09
3.80
0.00
0.01
14.99
0.46
11.645
0.003
0.002

31.53

451,615,136.54

174,297,025.92
36,805,864.50
211,360,410.00
12,333,730.22
35,843.81
402,398.80
10,196,803.60
121,439.11
3,941,839.25
4,868.58
2,114,912.75

Source: Self prepared. Data for metal composition from Geyer and Blass [9]; UNEP [32]; Öko-Institut, [19]

Gold
Silver
Palladium
Cobalt
Gallium
Indium
Copper
Chromium
Magnesium
Antimony
Beryllium
Praseodymium
Neodymium
TOTAL

3.46
35.13
1.27
725.58
1.04

1.15
5.76
773.39

0.01
0.05
6.72

Precious and critical
metal content in total
put on the market (t)

0.03
0.31
0.01
6.30
0.01

Monetary value of precious Precious and
and critical metals in total critical metal
content per unit
put on the market (€)
(g)

175,419,391.73

451,615,136.54

Monetary value of precious
and critical metals in units
put on the market (€)
Metal
Metal
price
(€/g)

Precious and
critical metal
content per unit
(g)

115,171,000

161,962,000

Smartphones

Sales (units)

Mobile Phones

Table 1 Precious and critical metals composition and their monetary value in mobile and smartphones put on the market (2004–2015)

89,153.87
314,647.17
175,419,291.72

126,043,142.40
15,807,219.75
18,369,774.50
14,540,569.09
254,884.94

Monetary value of
precious and critical metals
in toal put on the market
(€)

13

Sales estimations for the timeframe 2015–2035 were derived with regard to mobile and
smartphones in Germany (Fig. 4). Analyzing the annual sales rates of mobile phones in
Germany in the past (2004–2014), an average annual sales decrease of 25% can be observed.
Assuming the same decreasing annual sales rate for years to come, the expected sales of
mobile phones can be calculated. The sales forecast for smartphones was done based on the
Bass Model [31]. The theoretical principle of the model states that “the probability that an
initial purchase will be made at time T, given that no purchase has yet been made is a linear
function of the number of previous buyers.” (Eq. 6).
q
N ðt Þ ¼ b þ Y ðtÞ
y

ð6Þ

where,

N(t)
Y(t)
y
b
q

probability of purchase at time t
number of previous buyers
the total number of buyers
coefficient of innovators (adopt the new product independently of other individuals in
the social system)
coefficient of imitators (are influenced in acquiring the product by the pressure of the
social system -word-of-mouth communications and observation)

The number of innovators decreases with time, while the number of imitators
increases to a peak and gradually drops due to market saturation. The base model is
expressed as (Eq. 7):

U ðt Þ ¼

bþq


V t−1
ðN t−1 −V t−1 Þ
N t−1

ð7Þ

where,

U(t)
Vt−1
Nt−1

the increment of smartphones unit sales at time t
number of cars at time (t − 1)
maximum assumed number of consumers, as in the saturation level

The model assumes that the saturation level is achieved when the total number of
users equals the total population over 14 years old in Germany (66,100,000 consumers).4
Here, we assume, in the future, that the number of people above 14 years who will not
own a smartphone equals the number of people below 14 years of age who will.
However, the potential impacts of a variation of this saturation level should be further
investigated, since they can have impacts on the results.
4

Units put on the market (esƟmaƟon)

14

70000000

2016 - 2035

60000000
50000000
40000000
30000000

Mobile Phones

20000000

Smartphones

10000000
0
Year

Fig. 4 Forecast of sales of mobile phones and smartphones in Germany (2016–2035)

Scenario analysis
Q4: What stocks of precious and critical metals are available as secondary stocks based
on existing collection, reuse/remanufacture and recycling rates in Germany?

Base scenario
Based on sales of mobile phones and smartphones between 2004 and 2015 and precious and
critical metals contents of the two types of devices, the total stock of precious and critical
metals in mobile phones can be calculated at more than 5106 t and, in smartphones, this stock
amounts to around 773.4 t. Based on current market data, the total value of these stocks is
approx. 452 million € in mobile phones and more than € 175 million in smartphones. These
stocks could potentially be available as secondary source for these metals. Nevertheless, the
present collection rates in Germany are only 5% [19] whereof only 5% are reused [4]. This
implies that a total monetary value of more than 517 million € is currently not put to any use.
The 5% reuse/remanufacture rate was kept constant throughout the study for the timeframe
2004–2015; howbeit the potential reuse/remanufacture rates have been changed throughout
different scenarios for the timeframe 2016–2035.
Looking at the future, with anticipated sales of mobile phones and smartphones from 2016
to 2035, an additional total stock of precious and critical metals of approx. 213 t can be
expected for mobile phones and approx. 8335 t for smartphones will be “hidden” in these
devices. The total monetary value of these stocks can be estimated at € 1.9 billion.5 When
assuming that present collection and reuse rates will be maintained in the future, a total
monetary value of more than 1.4 billion € and more than 8 thousand tonnes precious and
critical metals would not be used.
Based on Figs. 5 and 6, it can be observed that the content of precious and critical metals
embodied in the reservoir of mobile and smartphones is much higher than the content of
5

15

4,000

3,500

3,000

Tonnes

2,500

Content of precious and
criƟcal metals in units put on
the market

2,000

Content of precious and
criƟcal metals in units
available for collecƟon

1,500

1,000

500

0

Years
Fig. 5 Mobile phones – content of precious and critical metals in units put on the market and in units available
for collection (based on current collection and reuse)

6,000

5,000

Tonnes

4,000

Content of precious and
criƟcal metals in units put
on the market
Content of precious and
criƟcal metals in units
available for collecƟon

3,000

2,000

0

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035

1,000




precious and critical metals in mobile and smartphones put on the market every year. This
demonstrates the potential of secondary supply to substitute primary mining.

Further scenarios analysis
Q5: What stocks and monetary value of stocks of precious and critical metals could be
kept in the cycle in Germany based on several scenarios of different collection and reuse/
remanufacture rates?
Next, several scenarios were modelled to analyze the potential to exploit these stocks and
their monetary value. For this purpose, assumptions on sequentially increasing collection and
reuse/remanufacture rates, were made. Three scenarios for collection and reuse/remanufacture
rates were modelled: a) current collection and reuse rates as per literature review; b) two other
scenarios with self-assumed potential collection and reuse/remanufacture rates based on
expectations on future potential development in mid-term and long-term future.

Scenario I As per Table 2, with the current collection rate of 5% and 5% reuse/
remanufacture rate this scenario predicts 2.5 million units for the timeframe 2004–
2015 available for reuse/remanufacture, and 27.2 million for the timeframe 2016–2035
available for reuse/remanufacture. The available stocks up to 2015 for recycling account
for 1.34 thousand tonnes precious and critical metals with a monetary value of € 1.13
million. This represents only 22.9% of the total stocks contained in mobile phones put on
the market (>5.8 thousand tonnes). However, after collection and reuse, recycling rates
have been considered in order to calculate the amounts of precious and critical metals
that could potentially be recycled. At this level, the UNEP recycling rates have been used
for the calculations [25]. According to this scenario, only 553.2 t of precious and critical
metals (which represent only 9.4% of the total amount of precious and critical metals
contained in mobile phones and smartphones put on the market) can potentially be
recycled in final treatment, with an estimated monetary value of € 62.14 million.
Looking at the future, for the considered timeframe of 2016–2035, a total number of 27.2
million units and a stock of 8547.21 t precious and critical metals with an estimated monetary
value of € 1.9 billion (based on current metal prices) will be available for recycling. By
applying the assumed recycling rates, a total stock of approx. 2465.10 t can be recycled with
an estimated monetary value of € 441 million (based on current metal prices). The number of
units that are collected for reuse is not so small; however, as discussed at the beginning of the
paper, the art of collection of these units cannot ensure an adequate quality for reuse/
remanufacture. Nonetheless, if current collection, reuse/remanufacture and recycling quantities
will not improve, more than half of available stocks will be lost.
Scenario II Assuming midterm advancement in the collection and reuse rates, a further
scenario has been modelled for the timeframe 2016–2035, by considering 50% collection rate
and increased reuse/remanufacture rates to 25% as per Table 2. Based on these assumptions,
for the analyzed timeframe (2016–2035) a total stock of approx. 8547 t precious and critical
metals will be available for recycling after collection with a total estimated monetary value of €
5%
5,880.29
627,034,528.27
1,347.89
125,454,143.40
553.21
62,137,214.29

Collection rate (%)
Reuse rate (%)
Metal content based on sales volumes (t)
Monetary value of metal content based on sales volumes (€)
Metal Content after collection and reuse (t)
Monetary value of metal content after collection and reuse (€)
Metal content recycled based on UNEP recycling rate (t)
Monetary value of metal content recycled based on UNEP recycling rate (€)

Source: self prepared

Base Scenario
2004–2015

Timeframe

Table 2 Precious and critical metals stock and monetary values with the assumed collection and reuse rates

5%
5%
8,547.21
1,909,299,987.49
5,416.97
886,783,858.99
2,465.10
441,079,394.69

Scenario 1
2016–2035

100%
50%

Scenario 3

11,300.99
2,008,414,704.50
5,242.85
999,406,913.24

50%
25%

Scenario 2

9,760.60
2,008,341,037.33
5,243.20
999,369,556.22



remanufactured, as long as these numbers refer to products which encompass the right quality
and functionality for these further purposes.

Scenario III Assuming a radical improvement in the collection and reuse/remanufacture
rates by achieving 100% collection and 50% reuse rates as per Table 2. For the analyzed
timeframe (2016–2035), a total stock 11,300.99 t of precious and critical metals can potentially
be recovered as a secondary source with an estimated monetary value of € 2.01 billion. By
applying the assumed recycling rates, a total stock of 5242.85 t with an estimated monetary
value of € 999 million can potentially be recycled. According to the third scenario, more than
1.2 billion units mobile and smartphones could be reused/remanufactured. It can be concluded
that the potential for reuse/remanufacture as well as recycling precious and critical metals from
this type of waste is quite high.

Results of the scenarios analysis
Considering the three scenarios, it can be noticed that the most advantageous scenario is the
third one, which is as expected, since the highest collection and reuse/remanufacture rates have
been assumed, and the highest potential for secondary supply of precious and critical metals
could be achieved. However, this is a rather theoretical case, since 100% collection is hard to
achieve in practice. The 50% collection rate scenario is more realistic. Within this specific
scenario, the highest amounts of precious and critical metals can be kept in the system as
secondary supply of these metals. The importance of separated collection of good quality endof-life mobile and smartphones plays here a key role for the future. Another interesting aspect
is that, for the 2016–2035 timeframe, the content and monetary value of the precious and
critical metals is influenced by the fact that, in the future, more smartphones will be available
as waste which contains higher amounts of gold than mobile phones.
Looking at the number of mobile and smartphones which could be reused/remanufactured,
the last scenario would be most advantageous, but not too realistic. As such, the second
scenario with approximately 404 million units looks more realistic. However, based on the
literature review, it was observed that the challenges for remanufacture in Germany are quite
high, since no system exists to separately collect mobile and smartphones and to pre-select
them according to their quality. However, the decision whether to reuse or not mobile and
smartphones depends also on potential environmental benefits which the literature speculates,
but which still need to be analyzed in a future study. Another aspect to be considered in a
future study is how many products at end-of-life still have reuse or remanufacturing potential
from a quality and functionality point of view.

Discussion & Conclusion
The current paper analyses five research questions:
Q1: What are the existing conditions for reuse/remanufacture and recycle mobile and

19

Q3: What stocks of precious and critical metals are contained in mobile phones and
smartphones in Germany?
Q4: What stocks of precious and critical metals are available as secondary stocks based
on existing collection, reuse/remanufacture and recycling rates in Germany?
Q5: What stocks and monetary value of stocks of precious and critical metals could be
kept in the cycle in Germany based on several scenarios of different collection and reuse/
remanufacture rates?
With regard to the Q1 and Q2, the low collection and reuse/remanufacture rates have
been identified as major challenges in Germany, followed by the fact that these products
are collected and recycled together with other WEEE and no official pre-selection
focused on reuse/remanufacture takes place. This impedes also a good quality and
functionality of the collected products towards reuse/remanufacture. Another hindering
aspect is the customer attitude in the western world towards remanufactured mobile and
smartphones. One alternative would be the preselection and remanufacture of these
products for being sold in the developing world where the market would be more open
towards remanufactured mobile and smartphones. The paper has demonstrated that there
is a high potential for collecting such products for reuse/remanufacture due to the
saturated market in Germany, however as discussed above, the infrastructure and incentives for higher collection rates are still lacking.
Q3 and Q4 deal with development of a mathematical model to calculate the potential
reuse/remanufacture for the German market, as well as stocks and monetary value of
stocks of precious and critical metals which could be retrieved as secondary source from
mobile and smartphones put on the German market during the timeframe 2004–2015.
With the current collection rate of 5% and 5% reuse/remanufacture rate the mathematical
model approximates a number of 2.5 million units for the timeframe 2004–2015 available for reuse/remanufacture. The available stocks up to 2015 for recycling account for
1.34 thousand tonnes precious and critical metals with a monetary value of € 1.13
million. This represents only 22.9% of the total stocks contained in mobile phones put
on the market (>5.8 thousand tonnes). Based on potential amounts which could be
collected, the potential for reuse/remanufacture is quite high in Germany. Nonetheless,
the current very low collection rates in a mix with other types of WEEE and no official
preselection regarding the quality of the returned products, as well as customers’ attitude
in the western world towards remanufactured mobile and smartphones make the remanufacture of these products unattainable under the current conditions.
Q5 calculates the potential reuse/remanufacture for the German market, as well as
stocks and monetary value of stocks of precious and critical metals that could be
retrieved as secondary source from mobile and smartphones when assuming gradually
increasing collection and reuse/remanufacture rates within three scenarios for the
timeframe 2016–2035. Sales estimations for the timeframe 2015–2035 were derived
with regard to mobile and smartphones in Germany using the Bass Model. A high
importance is set on analyzing the impacts of different assumed reuse/remanufacture
rates on the potential secondary source for the precious and critical metals in the
analyzed products. The model accounts for the different growth rates of sale of mobile



reusing/remanufacturing/recycling mobile phones and smartphones in Germany. It has
been demonstrated that separate collection/reuse/remanufacture and recycling of mobile
phones and smartphones with a focus on the recovery of precious and critical metals is
beneficial from an economic point of view. However, currently collection rates of
mobile and smartphones are very low and recycling of these devices takes place
together with the mix of WEEE, at the loss of precious and critical metals recovery.
At the same time, the developed model provides a reliable estimation of potential for
reuse/remanufacture mobile and smartphones in Germany. Further analysis needs to be
done towards the environmental and social aspects of reuse and remanufacture in
Germany in order to get a broader overview of the potential benefits and/or drawbacks
of reuse and remanufacture mobile and smartphones and their influence on recycling
these devices.
With reference to recycling as the last solution after reuse and remanufacture for
keeping metals in a closed loop, according to literature, best recycling efficiency for
mobile phones and smartphones involves being directly melted in pyrometallurgical
smelters without prior shredding [27]. In current recycling routes, however, mobile
phones are collected and recycled together with mixed WEEE, being first depolluted
and then shredded, process followed by metallurgical end processing to separate the
different material fractions (ferrous, metals, non-ferrous metals and aluminum). Oswald
[20] has also proved that avoided environmental burden is highest in case of separate
mobile phone recycling, where the entire material is fed to a copper smelter. Based on
the research of Gurita & Bongaerts [12] and the present paper, focusing recycling on
precious and critical metals is proven to be also monetary advantageous. In the short
term view, however, focusing on higher reuse/remanufacturing rates, the economic
value of precious and critical metals form separately recycled mobile and smartphones
would decrease, and this can represent a disincentive for the recyclers leading possibly
to lesser efficiency of recycling of precious and critical metals from this type of
devices. Nonetheless, in the long term, the implementation of such a closed loop,
targeting first reuse/remanufacture and then recycling will ensure a continuous feed
also for the recycling industry and the incentive to recycle precious and critical metals
will be in place. However, a next step would be to differentiate between reuse and
remanufacturing rates since the two options require different economic and environmental efforts to come in place. In addition, of high importance is a further analysis
focused on identifying and comparing the environmental benefits of mobile and
smartphones remanufacture versus recycling.
The present paper is assessing and evaluating the state of art, challenges, conditions
and implications of reuse/remanufacture mobile and smartphones in Germany with
regard to the potential of exploiting this waste stream as a secondary source of precious
and critical metals. The first part deals with identifying the challenges of reuse/
remanufacture mobile and smartphones in Germany, being followed by the development of a mathematical model to calculate the potential reuse/remanufacture for the
German market, as well as stocks and monetary value of stocks of precious and critical
metals which could be retrieved as secondary source from mobile and smartphones
when assuming gradually increasing collection and reuse/remanufacture rates. As a


