Today’s global business environment is characterized by exponential and unceasing
technological development and growth. Thus, reaching competitiveness at the global level
(whether of an enterprise or a country) is highly correlated with successful management of
innovation, technology and change. Innovation and technology became one of the main
components of every developed strategy whether we talk about firm, industry or national
economy. Its importance was examined by (White and Bruton, 2007), who stated that
technology management and entrepreneurship are crucial because of: (a) the rapidness of
technological changes which demands cross-discipline approach; (b) the rapidness of
technological development and increasing consumers sophistication, which have shortened
life cycles of products; (c) the necessity to cut time for developing product and create more
flexibility within organizations; (d) the need to maximize competitiveness by using new
technologies in effective manner because of increased international competition; (e) the
necessity to change management tools caused by rapid technology changes. All of these
dimensions of TIME importance are highly correlated with the concept of entrepreneurship.
Therefore, in order to have a competitive force which will lead to sustainable development
it is not only technology that matters, but also Technology Innovation Management and
Entrepreneurship (TIME). Capacities for measuring and observing performance are crucial
for successful TIME, but it is not a simple requirement since the activities of TIME are
interconnected, delay related to effects of research and development (R&D) investments,
etc. Theory and practice both showed that, since sustainable new technologies and
innovation are fundamental for economic, societal and technological growth, TIME is
becoming a key component for reaching sustainable development. Also, it is managing
technology, per se, is becoming at least equally significant (or even more significant) as the
technology capacity. Because of that, determination of the future TIME priorities relies on
measuring indicators at the level of national economy, economy sectors and companies. By
tracking these values it is possible to set and accomplish TIME efficiency and effectiveness
at different perspectives and levels. Classification of indicators by the Triple Helix concept
(Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff, 1995) is suitable for sustainable development and
entrepreneurship because this perspective obliges a comprehensive, complete approach.
The TH is based on the concept of the Entrepreneurial University, and it comprises the
hybridization of three dimensions/elements: University, Industry and Government in order
to generate new institutional and social formats for the production, transfer and application
of knowledge (The Triple Helix Concept, 2013). The TH is based on the concept of the
Entrepreneurial University, and it comprises the hybridization of three
dimensions/elements: University, Industry and Government in order to generate new
institutional and social formats for the production, transfer and application of knowledge
(The Triple Helix Concept, 2013). Thus far, indicators related to R&D activities, level of
innovation implementation and technology changes intensity were mostly used measures of
TIME development, but the practice and theory (Mirchev and Dicheva, 2013; Pearce,
Grafman, Colledge and Legg, 2008) showed the necessity for an overall methodological
approach. Therefore, in this paper, we suggest the general TIME model, a model of
sustainable technology and innovation management and entrepreneurship, which
systematizes TIME indicators according to the Triple Helix (TH) actors classified by basic
management functions of planning, organizing and control (POC).

This research is based on following hypothesis and assumptions:
General hypothesis:
1. TIME is as significant as technology development, per se, for achieving sustainable
development, and
Special hypothesis and assumptions:
1. The triple Helix concept is a basic sustainability model and indicators of TIME are
set up according to the dimensions of TH (University, Industry, Government),
2. Functions of TIME (Planning, Organizing, Control), classified according to TH
dimensions, provide the creating of the comprehensive, general model,
3. The general model with feedback relations is valid for application in making
effective decisions in strategic management in the state, university and industry areas.
4. It is possible to have a more effective strategic analysis, creation and implementation
of strategies and policies with concrete tasks for government, industry and university (TH)
related to the functions of planning, organizing and control (TIME), by applying the model
with classified indicators in practice.
In this paper, a new model is created for measuring sustainability of technology and
innovation management in relation to entrepreneurship. The model is general crossfunctional model TMD-TH, based on two concepts: (1) Triple Helix concept of three
dimensions: Government, University and Industry; (2) management and entrepreneurship
concept of three fundamental functions – planning, organizing and control. The authors
point out the interrelatedness between TIME, and basic TH actors and develop such a
model that enables monitoring, analysis and strategy leading to higher overall
entrepreneurial performance and sustainability.
1. Literature review
Creating knowledge-based economy and social club in the traditional sense is not sufficient
for significant economic and social growth and progress. In literature and practically it has
been identified that, although investment without any doubt has the main role in new
economic and knowledge progress, linkage of economic progress, global competitiveness
and new employment opportunities is missing (Levi Jakšić, Marinković and Petković,
2011a). As stated in (Kriščiūnas and Greblikaitė, 2007) knowledge-based economy is
highly entrepreneurial, and absence of knowledge about new inventions and new
technology means the absence of entrepreneurs in society because knowledge initiate
entrepreneurial behaviour, and thus entrepreneurship is one of the most important factors of
knowledge-based economy. Entrepreneurship in knowledge-based economy is becoming a
scientific problem, because of the mutual impact of modern entrepreneurship and economic
sustainability (Kriščiūnas and Greblikaitė, 2007). By United Nations (2012) enterprises
which focus their activities of the application of Research and Development, are a pillar of
knowledge-based economy. They claim that “the uninterrupted cycle of innovation and
successful commercialization of its results is largely determined by the intensive
collaboration of major stakeholders, that is institutions of applied research, private
innovative companies and government agencies establishing framework conditions for this
process”. Also, in this document, the main problem of the innovation process is identified
to be a lack of communication between industry and science. As a consequence, it causes

universities and other research institutions.
In 1950s a new phenomenon was detected: increase of physical capital investments with
simultaneous decrease of productivity indicators. This, so-called “productivity paradox”
(Bailey and Chakrabarti, 1988) and the fact that intangible elements were neglected showed
the necessity for a new perspective. In 1960s, these “soft” elements, previously developed
in Japan, were pouring into European countries (Sweden, Germany), and in the 1970s
continued toward the United States and refocused towards intangible assets. It was found
that productivity decreased because ideas, knowledge and creativity were neglected while
physical investments were increasing. This was evidence of inevitability of technology
components and knowledge in models of economic progress (Levi Jakšic, 2011).
Researchers quickly pointed the common success denominator: shifting from physical
capital toward the capital of knowledge: technology, science, ideas and creativity (Acs,
Audretsch and Strom, 2009). Since, knowledge alone was not enough for creating
competitive advantage, technology emerged as the integrative concept since it consists of
both tangible (physical) and intangible elements. This afforded a novel position for
understanding the competitiveness forces in the detailed analysis of the factors relevant to
technological development. As already mentioned, in Europe – “as measured by the most
common benchmarks of knowledge investments, such as R&D, university research, patents,
human capital, education, creativity and culture, Sweden has ranked consistently among
world leaders. However, following more than a decade a stagnant growth and rising
unemployment, concerned policymakers in Sweden started to worry about what they
termed as “the Swedish paradox” (Acs, Audretsch and Strom, 2009). Besides this term, one
another emerged, “the European Paradox” determining the stagnation of economic growth
regardless of the high level of knowledge investments (Acs, Audretsch and Strom, 2009).
New methodology approaches include not only focus on soft elements in the form of
intangible elements, but also entrepreneurship, leadership, principles and practices of
management and appearance of the technological dimensions (rather than technical) in
terms of achieving a high level of competitiveness (Levi Jakšić, 2011). According to
(Mirchev and Dicheva, 2013) “technology entrepreneurship is uniting the efforts of science
and business in the discovery of new technologies or the improvement of existing ones in
industrial enterprises with the purpose to enhance the quality of life of people and the
satisfaction of newly originated needs”.
Encouraging linkage of science and industry fosters innovation-based entrepreneurship and
this could be performed by open innovation projects, which develop cooperation in R&D
and ensure more effective commercialization of entrepreneurship. From another
perspective, universities also need feedback on their performance, and since rankings are
shown to be unreliable (Jovanović, Jeremić, Savić, Bulajić and Martić, 2012), education
institutions have to rely on industry to provide them with guidelines for new development
directions. In order to encourage collaboration of industry and scientific community it is
necessary to foster technology transfer from universities to the private business sector.
Also, to achieve this cooperation, scientific institutions should include entrepreneurship in
their curricula, and, on the other side, business subjects should be more actively included in
creating those curricula by including market requests and their experiential knowledge.
Also, cooperation between these two sectors could be fostered through the mobility of
employees from both sectors and another possibility is to induce academic entrepreneurship
by spin-offs (United Nations, 2012).
Examining the situation in Serbia, one of the most serious problems in science, by
(Government of Serbia, 2010), is the poor investments distribution, where the majority of
investment (mainly from one fund) are invested in fundamental research, for which 50.2%
of budget of the Ministry of Science and Technological development was allocated, and
technological development projects (39.2% of the Ministry funds) but very small amount is
invested in applied research. Although there were 501 fundamental research projects, 129
innovation projects and 471 projects related to technology development, the number of
patent applications from R&D has been extremely low, 54, which placed Serbia in the last
position among European countries. The same difficulties were detected in Europe also:
“The Europe 2020 strategy clearly signalled the importance of industrial competitiveness
for growth and jobs as well as for Europe’s ability to address grand societal challenges in
the coming years. Mastering and deploying Key Enabling Technologies (KETs) in the
European Union is central to strengthening Europe’s capacity for industrial innovation
and the development of new products and services needed to deliver smart, sustainable and
inclusive European growth” (European Commission, 2011).
The situation of difficult translation of newly created knowledge into merchantable product
The High-level expert group (HLG) recognized as “valley of death” issue. This gap affects
interruptions of value chains impacting in that way the overall sustainability of strategic
sections in Europe. Lack of regulations, insufficient R&D and political support and absence
of large investments are causing this problem. There are three possible strategies for
crossing the valley (European Commission, 2011):
1. Technological research – focused on transforming concepts which are the results of
fundamental research into technological solutions competitive at the global level.
2. Product demonstration – focused on use of KETs in order to make European
prototypes of products and processes more competitive at the global level.
3. Competitive manufacturing – focusing on advanced manufacturing of product
prototypes developed in the previous stage in order to make economic environment more
attractive based on industries that are competitive at the global level.
The HLG detected that the biggest issue in European R&D is the valley and the step
between basic research ideas and competitive production of KETs, although this sector has
a significant number of new KETs. This indicates that the both EU and its Member States
are too focused on basic research, and that they neglected enabling innovation in the EU.
Appliance of these innovation chain stages, proposed by the HLG, can generate a virtuous
cycle starting with the creation of knowledge to market flow, which provides the feedback
for supporting the creation of knowledge, thus strengthening European economic
development.
Innovation, as opportunity for creating new business, is at the core of entrepreneurial
efforts and therefore all the relevant actors in the business environment are analysed
according to their support to innovation and innovativeness. It is noted that the institutions
play a critical role in the promotion of innovation. The concept of national innovation
systems is developed with the goal to identify the relevant actors in the business
environment and their contribution to the overall innovation processes. Universities are
cited as critical institutional actors in national innovation systems (Mitra, 2011). The focus
is on changing university environment for business academic education, especially
developing and introducing technology innovation management and entrepreneurship
knowledge and skills in high education study programs. Emphasizing the new,

framework which highlights the grid of institutions in the entrepreneurship and innovations
(Levi Jakšić, Marinković, Petković and Kojić, 2012). By this concept, manufacturing is not
the post-industrial driving force of economic development, and the generation and
distribution of socially organized knowledge have the main role in generating an
economy’s competitive advantages. Further, organizations that create knowledge
progressively have a more important role in the grid of relations among the crucial actors:
Government, University, and Industry (Etzkowitz, 2007). Knowledge-based system can be
viewed as a result of collaboration between various social coordination mechanisms, such
as market, knowledge production and governance at interfaces (both public and private).
On the other hand, the TH concept, based on the relations of its actors, produces a heuristic
for examining these complex dynamics referring to developments in the institutional
networks among the carriers (Leydesdorff and Meyer, 2006). Those components should
create new social and institutional forms which should influence creation, transfer and
application of knowledge. As identified by Ivanova and Leyersdorff (2012), activities and
elements of these three entities are overlapping progressively, and in some parts of
intersections, the actors can even substitute each other partially. In Figure no. 1 are
presented relations between TH elements which are identified to be bilateral (when two
sectors are overlapping, and there is no overlapping between all three of the sectors) and
trilateral (when we have overlapping between each two sectors and also all three of the
sectors).

Figure no. 1: Bilateral and trilateral overlapping in a Triple Helix configuration
Source: Leydesdorff, 2012.
In both situations, although they have mutual activities, the relationships are in transition
because each actor also develops its own mission. Because of that, a balance of activities
can be created as integration or differentiation, and there could be examined and potentially
shaped some forms of synergies (Leydesdorff, 2012). TH does not use each component
separately: it can combine economic forces, regulations and research inventions and
observes the dynamics two (bilateral) or even all three components (trilateral).
The most explored topic related to the TH concept is the role universities have in
contemporary changing business environment and knowledge-based system. It is explored
from different perspectives, at the level of: sectors, regions, countries, etc. (Godin and
Gingras, 2000; Shinn, 2002). Some research studies (Levi Jakšić, Marinković and Kojić,
2012; Čudanov, Săvoiu and Jaško, 2012), confirmed the thesis of the existence of a
continual necessity to examine the role of the universities in society. There is a special

emphasis on the role universities have in practice and compliance of study programs at
different educational levels and practical knowledge requests of the market. TH is based on
the concept of Entrepreneurial University, which states that “it takes a pro-active stance in
putting knowledge to use and in creating new knowledge” (H-STAR, 2013). TH concept
assigned the leading role to universities because it assumes that the knowledge they
produce and transmit is useful enough to be widely shared and applied. Also, the appliance
of the knowledge created at universities should lead to national development. In brief, we
can say that every TH component has its role from a perspective of entrepreneurship:
Industry is the place of production; Government is the public entrepreneur which creates
contractual relations and assures stable interactions and exchange, and, the University is the
creator of knowledge and technology, the generative principle of knowledge-based
economies (Triple Helix Conference, 2011). We saw in Figure no. 1, that the boundaries
between these institutional elements are blurred because, by producing applicable
knowledge and sharing it to all key players in socio-economic system, University accept its
entrepreneurial role. On the other hand, in order to assure the prosperity, the role of
Industry is also to produce new knowledge and not only apply the one generated by
universities. Finally, by creating a framework of regulations, the Government has the task
to enable effortless interactions of University and Industry for their successful cooperation.
Some studies (Saad and Zawdie, 2011) also claim that developing countries have the
challenging request to realize the TH concept in practice, and in that way create a base for
sustainable system and reduce poverty. Thus, it is essential to measure the performance
within each TH component in a country, and further to define indicators and quantitative
measures for each of the three. In this paper, we develop an overall model which that
examines all of the three components, then focuses on each component separately, and
tested it in practice by measuring the performance of three countries.
2. Methodology
Technology and Innovation management is a process of planning, organizing, leading,
directing, organizing, coordinating and control all activities related to technology and has
the goal to provide continuous success. It involves both strategic and operational activities:
strategic – management of innovation, R&D activities, technology transfer; operational:
management of specific technology system, processes and operations within implemented
technology (Jakšić, Marinković and Petković, 2011b). TIME is a crucial success factor for
enterprises, sectors, economies and regions because it emphasizes a set of competencies in
the competency based competitiveness approach.
Taking into consideration the importance of TIME, and the overall approach of the TH
concept, a cross-functional TIME model was created (Figure 2). This model has two basic
dimensions: the TH dimension with three clusters/elements of the TH concept
(Government, University and Industry) and TIME dimension in which we use its basic
functions (Planning, Organizing, Control – POC). Within each TH cluster we examine the
POC functions of TIME and measure its performance. In this way, in every cluster can be
observed its current state, flaws, advantages and there could be set priority areas and
activities a system (state) should perform in order to achieve sustainability. Established in
this way, the feedback from this model can also be used as a tool for making effective
strategic decisions within the observed system.

Source: authors
For better understanding of the proposed model, we created a closer look at the model
based on system approach shown at Figure no. 3. Within every TH cluster we measure the
performance of POC functions by the presented model. Planning is observed as input
activity. In this section, we measure investments and infrastructure related to TH
component in which we perform measuring. Organizing is considered as process activity
which transforms inputs into outputs of the observed TH component. Control is the output
activity where the results of transformation of inputs are measured. Finally, as every system
requires a feedback, in this case it is crucial for making decisions for further planning and
investments, which is a key step in the process of achieving/enhancing sustainability. The
most challenging step in the appliance of this model is the separation of measures and
indicators of TH clusters, since, as already mentioned in the previous section, there are
progressive overlapping and so-called “grey zones” of the cluster’s influence on indicators.
In this case, it will be inevitable to repeat indicators within each cluster they have influence
on, but determining the weights of the indicators within each cluster.

Figure no. 3: Technology Innovation Management and Entrepreneurship Model
(Indicators taken from World Bank,2014; European Commission, 2009;
Eurostat, 2014b; OECD,2014)
Source: authors
Further, in Figure no. 4 we decomposed suggested model for each TH component, and
every sub-model consists of its own TIME performance indicators.
If we examine the benefits of the model defined in a presented way, it not only classifies
and systematizes the indicators, but also examines the relations and mutual influence of
these groups of indicators. This model enables measuring performance of TIME at the state
level, the level of national economy. Also, indicators of the developed model are applicable
in most cases, with some differences depending on the characteristics of the environment.
On the other hand, this model has certain drawbacks. Firstly, we mentioned the problem of
explicit separation of indicators within each TH cluster, which may be difficult when the
indicator has an impact on more than one component. Also, indicators used in this model
should be relevant, quantitative, measurable and with available data. In model suggested on
Figure no. 3 there were no explicit definition of indicators, the list was not closed and in the
model presented in Figure no. 4 the explicit classification was not performed. Further
research will be focused on solving these two problems: identification of indicators for each
TH cluster, by each POC function, relying on indicators measured by Eurostat, European
Innovation Scoreboard (EIS) World Bank, OECD and similar organizations.

Planning
(Input)

Organizing
(Process)
Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3
Indicator 4
Etc.

Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3
Indicator 4
Etc.

Controlling
(Output)
Indicator 1
Indicator 2
Indicator 3
Indicator 4
Etc.

Feedback
for strategic management decision making

Figure no. 4: Sub-models of TIME model for each TH cluster
Source: authors
3. Results and discussion
In order to test the proposed model, we selected a set of indicators from every TH
component, and classified them according to TIME model. In Table no. 1 we have the list
of selected indicators with corresponding TIME function. As a feedback, we took the
official indicator of a country’s competitiveness of World Bank – Global Competitiveness
Index (GCI) (World Economic Forum, 2012a). This indicator provides information about
both macroeconomic and microeconomic aspects of each economy, since it is compounded
by over 100 indicators that are measuring key parts of these aspects. In order to get the
whole image of a country’s competitiveness and sustainability in the global market, it is
very important to include each of these aspects, because they both have great influence on
its position and ranking among other countries. This indicator “contributes to an
understanding of the key factors that determine economic growth, helps to explain why
some countries are more successful than others in raising income levels and providing
opportunities for their respective populations, and offers policymakers and business leaders
an important tool for formulating improved economic policies and institutional reforms”
(World Economic Forum, 2012b).
Table no. 1: Selected indicators for testing cross-functional TIME model
Planning
Organizing
Control
Expenditure per
Charges for the use of
Researchers in R&D (per
student, tertiary (% of
intellectual property, receipts
million people)
GDP per capita)
(BoP, current US$)
ICT goods exports (% of total
R&D expenditure (% of
Personnel in R&D by sector
goods exports)
GDP per capita)
R&D Expenditures by
Cost of business start-up
ICT service exports (% of
science field (% of total
procedures
service exports, BoP)
R&D expenditures)
R&D Expenditures by
Time required to start a
Patent applications, residents
sector (% of total R&D
business (days)
expenditures)
Start-up procedures to
Number of publications per
register a business (number) researcher
Teaching staff in total
Number of new business
tertiary per 1000 people
registered
New density
GCI
Source: authors
In order to have more relevant test, we conducted data for three countries: Serbia, Austria
and Finland, and analysed achieved scores. Serbia, since the authors are familiar with the
characteristics of the environment, and Austria and Finland because these two countries
were ranked in top 20 countries, according to The Global Entrepreneurship & Development
Index (GEDI) (Global Entrepreneurship & Development Institute, 2014). The results were
observed for the year 2011, since this was the most recent year with the complete data for
all of the indicators.
Considering input data or planning indicators, we have the results on Figure no. 5. Results
of planning indicators show that, among three countries, Serbia has the highest percent of
investments in tertiary education, but the lowest score on expenditures in R&D, in which
Finland has the highest score. If we examine the structure of R&D expenditures, it can be
seen that in Serbia, most expenditures are in basic research, and the least amount is in
experimental and applied research while in the other two countries the situation is
completely different, where the priority is in experimental research, then applied research,
and the lowest priority has the basic research. Considering sectors in R&D expenditures,
Serbia again has a completely different structure than Austria and Finland. In Serbia, R&D
expenditures mainly come from Higher education, and the least amount is from Business
sector (less than 10%), while in Austria and Finland, R&D expenditures are primarily from
Business sector, with about 70% of total R&D expenditures in both countries.

Source: World Bank, 2014; Eurostat, 2014c.
Results of organizing cluster (Figure no. 6) show that in Serbia, there are the highest costs
of business start-up procedures, 7.8% of GNI per capita, while Finland has the lowest costs
of 1% of GNI per capita. In Austria it takes 25 days to start a business, while Serbia has the
shortest period of time for starting a business since its average duration is 13 days. Austria
also has the highest number of start-up procedures 8, while Finland has, in average, 3
procedures to register a business. Considering personnel included in science and research,
Finland has the highest number of researchers per million people, 7,422.9, while in Serbia
there are 1,221.15 researchers in R&D per million people. The structure of those
researchers is similar in Austria and Finland, where most researchers come from Business
enterprise sector, more than 50%, and in Serbia there is a situation that it has less than 5%
(2,6%) from Business enterprise sector, and the highest percent of 66% in High education
sector. Also, in tertiary education, Serbia has the highest number of teaching staff per
million people, 6,773.75, while Austria has the lowest number with 1,767.27 teachers per
million people.

Figure no. 6: Results of organizing (process) indicators
Source: World Bank, 2014; Eurostat, 2014c; Eurostat, 2014a.
To have a complete picture, an analysis of control indicators is made, and the results are
shown in Figure no. 7. As we said in the methodology section, in this part we have the
indicators which should be the results of planning and organizing activities. Finland has the
highest charges for the use of intellectual property, 3,187.72 million of US$, and Serbia has
a far lower amount of 56.90 million of US$. Finland also has the highest percent of ICT
goods export with 4.92% of total export, while Serbia again has the lowest score with
1.42%. When it comes to ICT service exports, the situation is slightly different, and the
lowest score has Austria, with 28.58% of total service exports, while Finland again has the
highest score of 42.63% of total export. Patent applications of residents are the highest in
Austria, 2,154, while Serbia again has very low score, compared to the other two countries
with only 180 patent applications. But, when it comes to the number of publications per
researcher, Serbia has the highest score of 0.482 publications per researcher, and Finland
had the worst score of 0.33. According to new density (the number of newly registered
companies with limited liability per 1,000 working-age people), Finland again has the
highest score of 2.62, and Austria had the lowest of 0.58.

Source: Eurostat, 2014c; World Bank, 2014; Doing Business - World Bank, 2013.
At the end, as a feedback, we give achieved score of the countries from World
Competitiveness Report, according to World Competitiveness index, as a measure of
achieved sustainability and innovativeness which is given in Table no. 2. Finland had the
highest rank in 2011, as the 3rd country, according to WCR 2012-2013, Austria was ranked
16th, and was the second among the three selected country, and Serbia had the lowest score,
as 95th country. With the provided classification of indicators we can examine what lead to
these rankings. Although Serbia had higher amount of expenditures in tertiary education, it
had a much lower amount of R&D expenditures of total GDP in comparison to Austria and
Finland. Also, the structure of those expenditures is completely different, so the most
expenditure were made in Higher Education, and not in Business Enterprise sector, as it
was the case in Austria and Finland.
Table no. 2: GCI score
GCI 2011
3
Finland
16
Austria
95
Serbia
Source: World Economic Forum, 2012b.
From another perspective of R&D expenditure structure, Serbia has the most investments in
basic research (as had also been stated in The Ministry of Serbia Report (Government of
Serbia, 2010) while Austria and Finland primarily focused on experimental research.
Considering process cluster, it is identified that although Serbia has the highest number of
tertiary teachers, it has a low number of researchers in R&D, also, the most of these
researchers are again in Higher education sectors, while in the two countries with better
competitiveness score the most researchers are in Business enterprise sector. On the other
hand, in Serbia there are no issues when registering a new business, considering the amount
of time and procedures, but the costs are higher than in other two countries.
To summarize, in order to achieve a higher level of innovativeness, Serbia has to focus
primarily on its inputs cluster. It has to redirect R&D funds from basic to experimental and
applied research, and increases its R&D activities in Business Enterprise sector and
increases the total amount of R&D investments. In process cluster it had no significant
issues, except again, the structure of R&D researchers which are focused on Higher
Education sector. These poor R&D activities lead to the low amount of charges for the use
of intellectual property and patent application.
In the above, we tested the general proposed model by identifying a set of indicators that
are the key for TIME. Indicators were from all the three components of TH model, and
were not classified separately by Government, University and Industry sectors. If done so,
the analysis would be more accurate and precise and problems of sustainability of an
economy should be better identified. Further research will focus on deeper analysis with
classification by the TH components.
Considering the provided research, the model is further to be decomposed for each TH
component, which will consist of its own indicators of TIME performance as shown in
Figure no. 4.
Conclusions
Changing global business environment developed perpetual and progressive technological
growth and development, and technology is the one that gives competitive advantage,
which makes it essential in developing strategies at every level. Thus, the need for
technology management is non-arguable (White and Bruton, 2007). Jakšić, Marinković and
Petković (2011b) claim that both theory and practice showed that management of
technology and innovation and technological entrepreneurship are the missing component
between technological development economic progress with new opportunities for
employment.
Research and development is oriented at concrete results measured by innovation as the
motor force of new value being constantly implemented in the economy and society
enabling their dynamic competitiveness and welfare efforts at achieving the efficient
transition of science into new technologies and new technology into new value are the main
task of effective time. In this effort, the actors in the changing business environment have
their special roles. The Triple Helix (TH) model is used in this paper to identify the main
actors and to especially underline their innovative and entrepreneurial roles by developing a
performance model to analyse their contribution. Also, the relations between the actors of
the TH model are analysed as the three pillars of a knowledge-based economy: (1) the
knowledge-producing sector (University), (2) the market (Industry), and (3) Governments
(Cooke and Leydesdorff, 2006).

performance of TIME at the level of national economy, emphasizing the roles of
institutions of the TH concept. The model, applied with the relevant indicators, could be a
basic for determining the level of TIME development at the national level. This model
evaluates the basic functions of TIME and enables tracking of their performance together
with the examination of the contribution of each TH component. The general model,
without classification in TH components was tested on the examples of Serbia, Finland and
Austria. The results showed that Serbia has major problems within input/planning section,
with investments that are not distributed in a proper way, with main focus on
fundamental/basic research, and poor knowledge application. The role of the business
sector in R&D is neglected in Serbia, and it leads to a low level of innovativeness and
sustainability. These results show how strongly poor management of technology and
innovation lead to poor entrepreneurship development which impacts the overall
sustainability of an economy. It also points out how important is the role of
entrepreneurship, emphasizing the results of Serbia, where entrepreneurship is not
developed enough. This country has significant funds in scientific research, but the
economic effects of these investments are negligible (Levi Jakšić, Radovanović and
Radojičić, 2013). The research also showed a discrepancy between basic and applied
research, implying the necessity for establishing links between of Research, Development
and Commercialization, which could be achieved through entrepreneurial cohesion.
Linking the entrepreneurship with these phases could be introduced as ResearchEntrepreneurship-Development-Entrepreneurship-Commercialization (Levi Jakšić, 2011).
The shortcoming of the research is the missing classification by TH components which
would lead to a better detection of problems within sectors of University, Government and
Industry and it would be the subject of further research of the authors. In order to define
sustainable goals, it is necessary to firstly develop the sub-models, and further to apply it in
concrete, real world situations. Also, before the classification and sub-model definition,
further research should define closed list of indicators, based on the data provided by
official, relevant institutions (World Bank, OECD etc.), and after that perform
classifications by the TH clusters. This would provide an overall tool which could
determine the cause and effect relationships, and enable strategic decision making and
sustainable TIME, with an ultimate goal of achieving sustainable development.

