At EU level, health expenditures have been constantly rising. Thus, while in 1990 6.85% of
GDP was the average percent allocated to healthcare in the EU, in 2013, it increased to
9.52% of GDP (World Health Organization, 2016), in parallel with increasingly wider
discussions concerning the need to improve performance and quality in this sector.
Therefore, designing a sustainable health system represents an important topic in Europe
and globally. The growing number of organizations ranging from the Sustainable
Development Council (German Rat für Nachhaltige Entwicklung) in Germany or European
Steering Group (ESG) on Sustainable Healthcare initiated by the European Commission in
March 2010, is the real proof.
To achieve this level of sustainability is required both the creation of bodies to manage
legal and social issues, as well as ensuring corporate profitability by introducing an
integrated management and reporting system based on the new ISO 9001: 2015 standard.
Since 1987, the year of issuing the first standards belonging to ISO 9000 family on quality
management, there were made numerous explanations and changes to the 2008 version, to
increase compatibility with other management systems.
Compared with the previous revisions, ISO 9001:2015 introduces an original configuration
called "high-level structure" which aims to ensure identical construction for all
standardized management systems. In addition to the structural changes, completely new
topics appear, introduced following the latest amendments, such as risk management,
change management and knowledge management.
Interestingly, compared to other areas, healthcare registred a low number of ISO certificates
(figure no. 1), fact triggered by several reasons. Quality management (QM) in healthcare is
a relatively young system, to which different requirements and criteria are applied, some of
them occasionaly competing against each other, like for example: Kooperation für
Transparenz und Qualität im Gesundheitswesen - KTQ and Qualität und Entwicklung in
Praxen - QEP, Germany; European Excellence Award or EFQM Award, administered by
the European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM); Total Quality Management TQM as suggested by Klazinga (2000) and Count and Meurer (2001), as well as European
Health Award (EHA). Moreover, for a long time, ISO 9001 was considered not applicable
to healthcare organizations and this is why, in 2012 appeared ISO EN 15224 - Health care
services Quality management systems Basic requirements EN ISO 9001: 2008, adapting
generic requirements of ISO 9001 to the special requests of health systems and familiarizes
also with risk management.
Last revision ISO 9001: 2015 introduces explicitly the concepts of "risk-based thinking"
and "organizational knowledge", which leads to the implementation at organization level of
both risk management and knowledge management, thus developed into integral parts of
their own quality management system.
Predictably, the audit concern in the coming years will change, redirecting itself in
particular towards risk management in healthcare, especially due to many quality problems
recorded in this field. However, measuring the quality of health and its assessment in
relation to firm requirements and criteria are just steps in the complex process of ensuring
high-quality care. In our opinion, the accurate solution for recording sustainable
improvements in health care is a system of management and integrated reporting - IMRS by
reason of various advantages it entails, such a model being essential to fulfilling ever higher
demands from medical area: companies must operate with ever increasing costs; existence
of multiple information on quality and classification of similar medical institutions
available online; additional regulatory and quality risks associated to problems concerning
quality; the existence of hygiene issues (such as the nosocomial infections) etc.
An integrated management and reporting model can competently facilitate the management
of all aspects listed above.

Figure no. 1. Percentage of health and social work certificates worldwide
Source: data processed from ISO Survey, 2014.

Insufficient literature on standardized integrated management system on the one hand
(Jørgensen, 2006), limited use of the Balanced Scorecard as a strategic planning model
(Kaplan and Norton, 1996; 2004; Kaplan, 2010) and the lack of a reference model for
integrated reporting in healthcare, on the other hand (Bisbe and Barrubés, 2012) can be
identified as major bottlenecks that led us to initiate our approach. Consequently, we
proposed that through our research to reduce the gap in the literature on sustainable
integrated management and reporting systems, using the already existing standardized
management systems. The plan resulted from the analysis of the development and steps
required for an IMRS implementation at a large medical company in Germany will provide
answers to some pressing questions of managers and practitioners.

2. Methodological design by synthesizing quality management and integrated
management state of the art
The research stems from concern of one of the largest German companies, a medical
services provider, RNR AG, which can be summarized in the following question: "How can
we implement an integrated management system, simultaneously optimizing business
processes, complying with the complex healthcare regulations and quality management
requirements, while at the same time fulfilling our strategic objectives? ". One of the
authors as part of the management team of this company, observed the challenge and

which the investigation methodology was established.
The literature review established some theoretical issues, including operational concepts
and definitions in the context of quality management in healthcare were decisive.
"Demographic change", "population aging" or "new and unforeseen healthcare problems "
(Shaw, 2003) indicated a correlation with permanently increasing spending and the need for
a reliable reporting system when assessing the impact of investments and quality of results
in healthcare (Groene et al., 2009). Although at developing stage, the proposals for an
international integrated reporting system (International Integrated Reporting Council, 2013)
or "One Report" (Eccles and Krzus, 2010) could provide a solution, as a way of "integrated
thinking", realization of decisions and actions that focus on "value creation in the short,
medium and long" (International Integrated Reporting Council, 2013, p. 14). On the other
hand, empirical studies on integrated management systems – IMS, started almost twenty
years ago (Rajković and Aleks, 2009) have sparked interest both in the business sector and
academic community (Olaru et al., 2014).
Secondly, an original definition for integrated management system in private healthcare
was outlined, considering the German healthcare industry and its standards. To contribute
beyond theoretical to the work of practitioners, the case study focused on a group of large
medical german companies characterized as being in the sustainability phase (Kaplan and
Norton, 1996) meaning that a large enterprise made significant investments and has as main
objective to increase the capital effectiveness. However, profitability remains linked to
increase operating capacity and nationwide coverage for the services they provide. Also, as
influential is the Balanced Scorecard – BSC, namely the indicators and targets included in
the financial perspective.
The opportunity to gather wide-ranging data on a large medical organization which
operates both in the public and private sectors; specific knowledge on the processes of a
real IMS, and making advanced research hypotheses were arguments for choosing
descriptive case study (Yin, 1984) as research instrument. This involves focusing on a
single aspect and analyzing its characteristics through a descriptive theory. Consequently,
the findings will contribute to deriving new questions, as in the case of IMS's definition. As
the case study data is relevant to a specific healthcare market, confirm the need for
additional exploration in order to extend the findings to the whole European health sector.
Given that most of input was qualitative, aspect sometimes subjected to criticism, the next
step will be the design and implementation of a questionnaire.

3. The design of an integrative approach in a German medical company
3.1 Definition and implementation phases of an integrated management system
Norm based management systems imply certain prerequisites. They claim to have a holistic
approach, but they are not part of the overall management tools used to achieve
organizational success.
Most of the recognized concerns are caused by:
 Weak or nonexistent link between standardized management system and the strategic
planning process or strategic financial objectives;
 The general controlling system excludes key features of standardized management
systems;
 The legal constraints for healthcare increase from year to year, while the
standardized management systems cover only a few. Therefore, businesses call for an
integrated approach to remain effective (Berwick et al., 1990, pp. 9-10);
 The additional reporting obligations to various stakeholders in the public health
sector (state, beneficiaries, health insurance companies, etc.), many of which focus on
issues of quality, introducing new concepts and different reporting systems, such as:
International Integrated Reporting Initiative ‒ IIRI, social responsibility reports,
Sustainability reports (Sustainability Reporting Guidelines ‒ GRI, 2013) or Intellectual
capital reports (Abeysekera, 2013). Without an integrated management system, providing
different reports but interconnected, to a single entity, that cover distinct concerns and
interests, will become a big challenge.
Therefore, we propose a definition of the integrated management system followed by an
implementation process in several steps, applied at various organizational levels.
The first level indicates incorporating all essential elements of normed management
systems of a business in the health sector into one integrated management system (figure
no. 2).
The relevant management systems are:







Quality management (ISO 9001:2008);
Risk management (ONR 49001 or ISO 31000:2009);
Knowledge Management (unregulated before by an international norm);
IT-Security management (ISO 27001:2013);
Health and safety management (OHSAS 18001:2007);
Environmental management (ISO 14001:2007 or EMAS).

Figure no. 2. Norm-based elements of an IMS applied in the healthcare industry

"Quality Management in Health" which concerns both patient safety and clinical risk
management (TÜV SÜD, 2014). This holistic approach advanced by the new standard sets
out clearly the efforts undertaken towards integration and the company's commitment to
achieving long-term competitive advantage in providing medical services on the market
where it operates.
The second level includes integrating a IMS model in the strategic planning process by
using a BSC.
Being a complex strategic management and performance evaluation instrument, BSC links
each strategic objective with the different perspectives of management. In this regard, BSC
runs four dimensions: financial, internal processes, customers and learning and growing,
aligning value sentences for different categories of stakeholders, with profitability and
performance. Excepting the financial segment, the other sides of a BSC are components of
normed management systems. Simultaneously with implementing the BSC System is
recommended as a priority to define a "warehouse" for performance key indicators that will
be associated to the BSC quadrants.
The source of the performance key indicators used by BSC turns at the same time in a solid
foundation for internal and external reporting, updating the third level of integration.
In view of the above, in our opinion, an integrated management system can be defined as
follows: a IMS is the system that uses the minimum of standardized management systems quality management system, risk management system, knowledge management, IT security
management, health and occupational safety management, and environmental management,
interconnected through strategic planning via Balanced Scorecard and made public through
an integrated reporting system. Because sustainability is a critical factor and a success one
at the same time, the continuous improvement process is mandatory for all standardized
management systems, in conjunction with the provision of specific components of an
organization that learns, found in the learning and growth perspective of the BSC.

3.2 Overview of Radiologische Netzwerk Rheinland - RNR
RNR stands as the acronym of a group of German companies offering medical services that
range from radiology, neurology and nuclear medicine, to oncology and radiation therapy.
The medical network consists of RNR AG, the parent company of RNR group, organized
as a limited company according to German law, and three operating companies specialized
in radiology and radiotherapy. With 12 own locations where services are offered directly to
patients and another 13 sites in various hospitals as part of clinical services, reliable and
qualified employees make RNR one of the most significant German medical organizations
in its category (Figure no. 3).
The shareholders are the management team and the physicians from the company, which
began as a family business with no outside investor. This structure focuses on sustainable
development of the enterprise and not on achieving short-term profits.
The administrative tasks (e.g., IT, human resources management, quality management,
building management or organizational communication) are concentrated in RNR AG, its
headquarters and performed about 200 employees, while the operating divisions has other
850 employees. The growth of the company transfromed it considerably from 1st January
2010 when doctors organized in so-called Gesellschaft Bürgerlichen Rechts ‒ GbR (Civil
law partnership), and adopted the current structure of a join stock company for the group
leader, reinforced by three other companies with limited liability.

Figure no. 3. Values and strengths of RNR AG
However, rising costs for radiology and radiotherapy, in addition to the high volume and
complex activities bring supplementary pressure, requiring a unique management style for
pledging profitability, while complying with high quality standards.

3.3 Developing the IMRS for the RNR group
After obtaining the ISO 9001:2008 certificate, the RNR group has scheduled expanding the
existing risk management system to the operative part of the company in 2014,
incorporating all management systems into a single structure. Additional support for this
idea came along with the new edition of ISO 9001:2015 in which the integration of risk and
knowledge management is compulsory. After the Interim working draft of ISO 9001:2015
issues in december 2014, the QM team of RNR decided to start a project for implementing
an IMRS, according to the steps outlined below.
• Decision of the Board of directors
To start a holisitic project is necessary to obtain full support and commitment of the Board.
A key factor in accepting the proposal to implement a IMRS in February 2015 was the
desire to create an instrument that will join the company's financial results with the legal
requirements of standardized management systems.
Along with increasing efforts of stakeholders on relevant laws and regulations, being
classified as a large company, RNR Group will be among the first organizations to be
audited. As a result, the implementation of such integrated management and reporting
system is an important milestone for the members of the Board in establishing a
management system useful for fulfilling the legal requirements.

review and provide with analysis and revision after each stage, as well as understanding and
acknowledge the conclusions. An in line requirement was that the design of processes and
systems to ensure improved current activity and to minimize in parallel manual work, like
for example, automated data collection and reporting. Next obligation was focusing on
"flexible and agile processes" for the implementation and operation of the management
system. By "agility" is understood the ability of processes to adapt to future organizational
growth, a new broader structure, while "flexibility" means that RNR does not expect to hire
more employees for maintaining the system effectively. Finally, the evaluation was
requested to determine overall success.
 Expanding the risk management to the operational parts
After restructuring from 2009 and early 2010, with a join stock company as head of the
group, RNR AG Group had to develop a system of risk management, including financial
and strategic ones. The requirements were met in late 2011 through the implementation and
operationalization of a risk management system in accordance with ONR 49001.
In 2012 ISO 15224 (DIN EN 15224) was issued, as a general interpretation emerging the
requirements of ISO 9001 standard on quality management for health care services, with
concrete elements of risk management in healthcare. Moreover, in 2013 the external audit
for ISO 9001 at RNR AG indicated growing interest of auditors for risk management.
Therefore, the overall progress in risk management encouraged RNR choice to extend the
existing risk management to operational risks, providing a distinct advantage to start
actions. Thus, it needed only an update of the Manual of risk management, risk processes
and tools for financial and strategic risks in RNR AG, and also the existing quality
management system which already was including elements related to operational risks,
required only adapting them to comply with distinctive risk management requirements such
as, for example, hygiene management, radiation protection, occupational safety
management or privacy policy.

4. Results and discussions
4.1 Integration of various management systems into a single system
Each of the management systems (quality management, risk management, knowledge
management, IT security management, health and safety management, and environmental
management) has particular processes and applications.
For quality management, for example, they have been recognized:
 The online manual on quality management concerning the standard operating
procedures;
 Documentation of the audit results on an online platform;
 Annual planning of internal and external audits;
 Periodical management audit.

For the risk management system, the following essential components were previously
fixed:





Online documentation of risk and assesment;
Online documentation and management of risk management tasks;
Annual risk report for the management team;
Web application for risk control.

The final target was to use existing components of both management systems and combine
them into a single integrated system that meets the requirements of all systems, for ensuring
resource allocation and improving the acceptance of users, permitting them to operate with
already familiar features.
The Risk Management Handbook for RNR AG was the foundation, adapted then to cover
operational risks for all the group companies. It was also decided that for the quality
management system, an online version of the manual to become available to employees.
The next phase was to extend the online platform for documenting and assessing the risk
and operational risks. While the old system of risk management was accessible only to
RNR AG staff, the new platform was intended to be accessible to all employees. Hence, the
operational risk management platform was introduced in two stages.
Primary, it was introduced an online form to document "adverse events". Then the RNR
AG team assesses the risk of reported adverse events with regard to the presence or absence
of a potential risk associated with each event. If the event is declared as risk after an
assessment on several levels, an expert group decides on how to reduce or avoid it. All
levels are documented in an online workspace where each interested employee or external
auditor can track the prompt status of individual risk. This method of collecting unwanted
events is later taken to build an operational risk management system, which allows a quick
overview of potential risks that could arise within the organization.
Figure no. 4 captures an image of RNR platform for risk reporting and controlling. On the
left once can select the companies of the group, departments and the reporting year. The
risk matrix indicates then the risks to the chosen structure based on the probability of
occurrence and potential damage. Risks with high probability of occurrence and damage are
positioned in the top right corner of the matrix. At the bottom, can be traced the evolution
of the number of risks and an indicator for the development of the potential value of the
damage.
In the second stage, which requires carefully structured descriptions of each of the
processes, the base business processes are analyzed for identifying potential risks. By
analyzing each step of a base process and evaluating possible violations of a group of
processes, the process experts describe potential risks, evaluate them according to latent
damage and ultimately decide on management strategies. As previously, the measures are
documented online in the risk management workspace.
The results of documenting "undesirable events" and risk analysis of the process were
integrated into the internal audit checklist, and thus including operational risk management.
As a novelty, now, auditors check whether employees have recognized and applied the
standard operating procedures for risk management.

A similar procedure was carried out to integrate the two management systems into the
control platform. All "adverse events" were classified by themes and labeled consistent
with the location where they occurred, and their list was published on the business
intelligence platform. Thus, the Board of directors can obtain monthly all information on
categories of undesirable events that took place in each site, unlike the former system of
strategic risk management which reported to the Council at every six months. The
integrated management system has kept the same reporting model, but then again with
availability of daily reporting.

4.2 Connecting and aligning IMS - a strategic planning system
Before the opening of each new fiscal year, the group organizes a workshop for defining
strategic business objectives for the coming year. For 2016 was discussed introducing a
BSC as a tool for connecting strategic planning with the integrated management systems.
The idea of a BSC in a healthcare organization that holds an ISO 9001 certificate is not a
completely new topic since many aspects of BSC are already implemented by ISO
standard. Nonetheless, the BSC designed within the RNR group holds five instead of four
perspectives (Figure no. 5):

Figure no. 5. Balanced Scorecard of the RNR Group within IMRS
 “Financial perspective” - exists in every company.
 “Results perspective” - is necessary in healthcare for the public sector as the
 number of patients/treatments does not often correlate with the financial aspects due
to the fixed budget in the public sector.
 “Customer perspective” - was active in the quality management system, by
 addressing topics such as customer satisfaction, needs and expectations of clients of
RNR AG.
 “Process perspective” - is an indispensable part of the DIN ISO 9001. The quality
 management handbook labelled the core processes, but most of them lacked a quality
oriented description of indicators, focusing predominantly on performance indicators.
 “Resources or employees’ perspective” - is included in the DIN ISO 9001. Still,
the controlling and reporting system mentioned it only for financial reasoning, missing
other features.
Although that in the control and reporting system of the company, the "Financial" and
"Results" perspectives were already present, while the next three have emerged as a result
of the ISO 9001 certification, however, the first two perspectives were independent, while
last three were not part of the control and reporting standard system.

4.3 Implementation of the integrated reporting system
RNR group has a dual reporting system, one internal and one external, the priority being the
integrated reporting internal system.
By the time the project started, the members of the Board were informed about the financial
situation through a monthly report, coupled with an online Business Intelligence tool,
which present daily performance indicators. In addition, strategic and financial risks were
reported to the Board every six months. Finally, the results of QM system were analyzed

strengthening of diverse existing reporting systems.
The project team had to develop a reporting structure for covering all requirements of
internal stakeholders regarding frequency of reporting, the extent of the presentation of
results and the balance between quantitative and qualitative indicators. At technical level,
the IMRS team worked together with the in-house developer of the business intelligence
solutions by defining data sources relevant to qualitative indicators and presentation
techniques on the controlling online platform.
RNR Group uses the external reporting in accordance with the laws of economics and
communicates the results to banks and its shareholders, but also to the main partners. In the
first stage of the IMRS project, external reporting was not a priority because of the many
legal restrictions involved.

Conclusions and practical implications on the incorporation of an IMS
Implementing the requirements of ISO 9001:2015 on risk management, opportunities and
knowledge comes as the next logical step in building the integrated management system.
The company has already organized financial risk management and the operational side
extension was formerly planned because of indications included in ISO 15224 and other
recommendations. An important consequence of this success for RNR AG is ISO
9001:2008 certificate which will materialize in reducing the time for applying the
requirements of the new ISO 9001: 2015 version.
Another benefit is the reduction of redundant work related to management systems;
therefore, future quality audits will include elements of risk and knowledge without
additional checks and assessments.
It is worth mentioning the improvement of the quality of information used in decision
making process, resulting from merging separate management modules which currently
work unabridged. The contribution of each activity of IMS to the strategic objectives is
confirmable for each BSC perspective, clarifying the connections between the IMS subcomponents: strategy, mission and business objectives. We emphasize once again that ISO
9001: 2015 with its "high-level structure" and innovative components is an essential step
towards an integrated management system, regardless of the activity. However, our
research project goes beyond ISO 9001:2015, the success of an IRMS can be guaranteed
only when there is a deep integration with strategic planning through a BSC and an
integrated AND structured reporting system.

