Logistics Research (2018) 11:9
DOI_10.23773/2018_9

Logistics as a Science – Central Research Questions
in the Era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Invited Paper based on the Position Paper of the Scientific Advisory Board
of Bundesvereinigung Logistik (BVL)[1]
W. Delfmann1, M. ten Hompel2,3, W. Kersten4, T. Schmidt5, W. Stölzle6
Received: 20 October 2017 / Accepted: 8 July 2018 / Published online: 28 August 2018
© The Author(s) 2018 This article is published with Open Access at www.bvl.de/lore

ABSTRACT

1

Fourth Industrial Revolution or Industry 4.0 denotes a
fundamental change on how production and business
in general is perceived and organized. This paper
questions the role of logistics within this context and
raises a claim for a central role in future. It is a revision
of a current position of the Scientific Advisory Board
of Bundesvereinigung Logistik (BVL). Based on the
insight that Logistics 4.0 is a crucial element for the
implementation of Industry 4.0 three hypotheses are
derived. In further elaboration, the paper introduces
a total of 11 key research questions that are of central
importance to the research community.

In view of the fundamental changes in the economy and
society resulting from the so-called Fourth Industrial
Revolution (“Industry 4.0”), it is necessary to reposition
logistics as a discipline and a science – because it is a
central element in, and the driving force behind, this
development. Logistics has developed from being a
pure service-providing activity – delivering the right
goods to the right place at the right time – to become
a key driver of digital and societal change. Topics
like the Internet of Things and Services, big data or
autonomous driving are inseparably intertwined with
logistics today. In this process, logistics as a science
and an economic sector drives not only the application
but increasingly also the development of basic methods,
algorithms and technologies.
In 2010, the Scientific Advisory Board of BVL
outlined in detail its understanding of the scientific
discipline of logistics in a position paper [2]. Building
on this paper, it now appears a matter of urgency to
underline the central role of logistics in the context of
Industry 4.0 (referred to hereinafter as “Logistics 4.0)
and to reflect on the key challenges facing logistics
research. With this Position Paper, the Scientific
Advisory Board of BVL would like to define the central
questions regarding the future of logistics in the era
of the Fourth Industrial Revolution with the aim of
making a fundamental contribution to the discussion,
organisation and further development of Logistics 4.0.
In this endeavour, the Scientific Advisory Board
draws on two central preconditions or core elements
of Industry 4.0 that will also be essential for the
future of Logistics 4.0: on the one hand, this concerns
digitisation, decentralisation and interconnection, and
on the other, a fundamental shift towards autonomous
control and organisation, symbolised by the Internet
of Things and Services. It was in this context that
the coming of the Fourth Industrial Revolution was
proclaimed at the time of the Hannover Fair in 2011.
Frequently described as a “Copernican revolution”,
this is a priori knowledge – in other words, a logically

KEYWORDS: Logistics 4.0 · Industry 4.0 ·
Decentralization · Digitization · Human collaboration

W. Delfmann1
delfmann@wiso.uni-koeln.de
M. ten Hompel2,3
tenhompel@iml.fraunhofer.de
W. Kersten4
w.kersten@tuhh.de
T. Schmidt5
thorsten.schmidt@tu-dresden.de
W. Stölzle6
wolfgang.stoelzle@unisg.ch
1

2

3

4

5

6

Department of Business Policy and Logistics,
Universität zu Köln
Chair of Materials Handling and Warehousing,
Technische Universität Dortmund
Fraunhofer Institute for Material Flow and Logistics
IML, Dortmund
Institute of Business Logistics and General
Management, Technische Universität Hamburg
Institute of Material Handling and Industrial
Engineering, Technische Universität Dresden
Chair of Logistics Management, University of St.Gallen

shared by major sections of the international scientific
community.
This realisation can be roughly described as follows:
In tomorrow’s world, it will be possible to organise
logistics more efficiently based on autonomous entities,
and the degree of corresponding decentralisation and
self-organisation will grow parallel to the complexity
and dynamic development of logistics value added
systems.
Even if there is no standardised nomenclature on the
identity of autonomous entities; this view summarises
such things as “intelligent” containers, smart devices,
robots, autonomous vehicles etc. that are frequently
referred to as “cyber-physical systems” and whose
common feature is a certain (undefined) degree of
autonomy and that interact with each other and with
their environment.
The resulting change is fundamental in nature and
will affect all sectors and disciplines in logistics –
from planning and technical organisation through to
management.
Against this backdrop, we can derive three core
hypotheses for Logistics 4.0.
CORE HYPOTHESES
Logistics plays an absolutely central role in the
allencompassing digitisation of the economy and
society. This means it is even more important as a
subject of research than was already the case – because
without adequate logistics the Fourth Industrial
Revolution is simply inconceivable. Logistics is the
backbone of these developments. The goal is to create
flexibly interconnected, complex, distributed systems
based on a continuous and autonomous exchange
of data and information between human actors and
physical, technical objects. Within the context of the
Fourth Industrial Revolution, the aim is to develop
industrial systems and networks to the stage where they
can extensively control themselves within a certain
technical and organisational framework while adapting
as flexibly, efficiently and effectively as possible to
continually changing circumstances.
The implementation of Industry 4.0 without
Logistics 4.0 is just as unthinkable as the globalisation
of the economy without logistics networks that span
the world. The primary tasks of logistics include not
only network management but also the structuring
and control of these networks – both from a scientific
point of view and in the areas that call for hands-on
organisation. This leads us to recognise that:
– Logistics is the prime mover of the Fourth
Industrial Revolution.
– Logistics is both the driver and the basis of the
Fourth Industrial Revolution.

– Logistics calls for a joint theoretical foundation for
technology and the economy as well as for strategy
and operations.
In view of these hypotheses, it is absolutely essential
that we intensify research into the topic of Logistics
4.0. The hypotheses also give rise to a whole number of
central research questions, and finding answers to these
questions poses a major challenge to logistics research.
The following pages outline some of the questions that
are of central importance and address the more specific
considerations in greater detail.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
1.

Like Industry 4.0, Logistics 4.0 is based
on a priori knowledge. One research
question that is still wide open concerns the
verifiable effects that Industry 4.0 induces
in logistics in terms of efficiency, flexibility
and availability.
The vision of digitisation is penetrating all areas of
logistics process chains – from production, through
procurement, to distribution – and therefore driving
expectations and ideas concerning the possibilities
associated with the future organisation and
implementation of processes, installations and systems.
At the same time, however, there are widely differing
views on how digitisation will create value added.
This is an area in which comprehensive
interconnection of information technology rapidly and
directly opens up new opportunities. And although the
absolute data volume in all sectors of the economy has
been growing apace for quite some time, the fronttoend recording and processing of all company-related
process data remains a key challenge – and one that,
with few exceptions, has not yet been successfully
mastered. Without recourse to all too visionary ideas,
it is easy to recognise the benefits of the availability
of faster, more comprehensive and above all errorfree information. Information that is available at short
notice and suitably processed represents knowledge,
and enables the recipient to respond more quickly, for
example, to detect wear at an early stage or to predict
failures – just some of the central skills needed by an
agile and efficient company. Moreover, it is undisputed
that data as such constitutes a value – increasingly so in
the context of Logistics 4.0. This value can be increased
both by exchange and by processing. Machine learning
of the kind employed in Logistics 4.0 for the analysis
of large data volumes (e.g. predictive analytics) or
the control of cyber-physical systems (e.g. image and
speech analysis, gesture recognition) further increases
the value of the data. The systematic interconnection of
intelligent process modules lays a promising foundation
for the interconnection of distributed information
solid evidence is still needed.
The general consensus is that the key value added
provided by Logistics 4.0 is that it permits the
systematic exploitation of the performance capability
of digital modules in order to shift operational decisions
such as the allocation of orders or the creation of
sequences directly to the process level. This paradigm
shift towards the autonomy of machines, equipment
and objects such as workpieces and goods will be a
key competence in the endeavour to master volatile
and highly individualized procurement, production and
distribution activities in years to come.
This type of system architecture is associated above
all with two main properties: namely high efficiency
and great robustness. Despite the potential, these
properties do not come about by themselves. In the
case of decentral solutions, efficiency is based on the
assumption of higher performance capability, as the
systems (can) react dynamically to changes. However,
in most cases dynamic behaviour will not be sufficient
to offset the absence of a global system perspective
(status overview).
Due to the high degree of parallelity, it is often also
assumed that autonomous, decentral systems possess
great robustness (against failure). This is true, for
example, where the failure of a monolithic control system
directly leads to overall system failure. A decentral
control system may be able to largely compensate for
the failure of individual components. However, one
of the factors that is of interest in this connection is
the time needed to react to failures. Depending on
the underlying design concept, notification of failure
information by means of sequential communication
of individual system participants is characterised by
systemic inertia. Topical individual questions therefore
include the following:
– What scope of decentral decision-making
is meaningful and expedient? Which global
information should be kept available in order to
permit efficient system operation, and under what
boundary conditions?
– How does fault information act in decentrally
controlled systems, and what level of dynamic
behaviour does a locally interconnected system
exhibit?
– Which rules are to be defined for the necessary
system reactions, and how can a differentiated
assessment of the performance characteristics at
different performance points within the system be
assured?
– How can decentrally controlled systems
be modelled in terms of methodology and
transparency in order to permit valid scientific
assessment of their expected properties? Is
supplementing suitable models from information
science with a physical perspective (including

3

no copying, no deleting of objects) a suitable
approach?
2.

Do the conventional ways of developing,
assessing and launching product, service
and business model innovations in the
market constitute an obstacle to Logistics
4.0? What new approaches can be identified
in this context, and what are the resulting
potentials?
Digitisation has already resulted in far-reaching
changes to value added chains and business models in
many different sectors. It is frequently the case that
entirely new actors outside the established companies
are the ones who analyse and question the existing
value added processes in light of the new options
offered by digitisation and interconnection. One of the
key characteristics of these changes is the high speed
of innovation. Prototypes are created and developed in
rapid succession. Products are launched on the market
at an early stage with a core functionality, and much
of the development of additional functions takes place
after the market launch at the request or on the initiative
of customers. Detailed milestone and work package
planning is replaced by agile planning methods like
“scrum”; microeconomic assessment is based on longterm business cases. The necessary start-up phase is
financed by venture capital investors interested in value
appreciation. [3],[4]
In contrast, innovative logistics technologies,
solutions and services are generally developed on
the basis of proven processes and methods for the
development of products and services and with the
help of economic efficiency calculations. Although
development processes have become ever faster in
recent years, the aim has always been to only bring
logistics technologies and services onto the market
when they have reached a high degree of maturity.
Innovative logistics services are in turn often
developed in collaboration with pilot customers as
value added services (contract logistics) and require
the individualised, customer-specific bundling of
different logistics services, something that generally
involves a greater depth of integration. One of the
elements of these kinds of value added services is the
close interlinkage of planning and control systems –
and also of ICT systems – between the relevant actors.
[5],[6],[7]
The outsourcing of value added services by shippers
involves wide-ranging cost efficiency calculations
that address not only the cost factor but also the
performance, and in particular the quality standards
of a logistics service provider, and that also entail a
process of risk analysis. This applies in similar fashion
to logistics service providers, who make sometimes
considerable (up-front) investments in assets – often
based on customer specifications. The durations of the
contracts often differ from the amortisation periods
microeconomic review mechanisms (e.g. market
analysis [products, customers and competitors],
forecasts, business cases and investment and cost
efficiency calculations). [8]
Business ideas developed in connection with
Logistics 4.0 often exhibit different characteristics.
They may, for example, be based on a new device, a
new app or new software. The primary focus is not
on the (new) outsourcing of comprehensive physical
logistics services or the creation of new logistics
process chains. Instead, decentral intelligence in
logistics objects permits rapid reaction to changes
in the logistics environment. This paves the way for
the replacement of high-powered planning processes
with smart control mechanisms. Development and
market launch are often a matter of just a few weeks or
months. The predictability of the increased benefit for
the actors in question is also highly limited, however
– particularly against the backdrop of the strong
technological momentum. One of the reasons market
segments become blurred is that digital products
and services cannot be classified using conventional
segmentation criteria.
This means that classic processes for product and
service development and microeconomic review
mechanisms are at odds with the characteristic features
of Logistics 4.0 solutions. Development and market
launch take too long, and the use of traditional review
mechanisms may result in a situation in which product,
service and business model innovations from the world
of Logistics 4.0 have no prospect of market introduction
if the classic review mechanisms are applied. [9], [10],
[11]
Using the above as a starting point, we can identify
the following urgent individual questions:
– Will we see a fundamental change in the value
added model, and will this be sufficiently taken
into account by the available approaches to the
development, assessment and market introduction
of logistics innovations?
– Do more recent agile approaches based on the
trial-and-error principle create greater flexibility
and increase the market prospects of product,
service and business model innovations?
– How do these new approaches have to be organised
in order to integrate agility and quality demands
and to build bridges between the actors of
digitisation and classic logistics service providers
as well as shippers – to the benefit of both sides?
– How must alternative review mechanisms be
organised to ensure not only rapid market launch
but also adequate risk provisioning for the actors
in question? How can new review mechanisms of
this kind be put in place?
3.

How will the normative and operational
levels (planning and control) be organised

in future? Will there be separation of these
two levels in future?
At its core, the Fourth Industrial Revolution is
inseparably linked to the introduction of autonomous,
self-organising entities. This is designed not only to
pave the way for Industry 4.0 but also to promote the
emergence of “self-organising adaptive logistics” [12]
(Logistics 4.0). Following on systematically from this
a priori knowledge, we arrive at the conclusion that
the operational, near-realtime control level will in
future make its own decisions, eventually leading to
self-organisation in the more distant future. Logically,
this would result in the decoupling of near-realtime
operations within logistics systems and networks.
In order to make decisions on an operational
level, it is in particular at this level that applicationspecific information must be stored and propagated.
This information includes, among other things, the
topology and the layout of material flows and networks,
strictly defined rules and semantics, and ultimately
all information that permits decentral, autonomous,
targeted decisions within the system in question. The
goal is to achieve greater flexibility and changeability
on operational level. At the same time, the decoupling
of the operational and normative levels creates much
improved options for the standardisation of supply
chain management. This benefit appears evident but
has not yet been verified in vivo to date.
There are a number of basic individual questions in
this context, including:
– How can targeted, strategic and efficient action be
achieved in the distributed systems of Logistics 4.0
(based on a high number of autonomous entities),
and how must the (operational) framework for
action and the target systems of decentral entities
be organised to achieve favourable properties in
the overall system?
– Can business objects, functions and processes
be standardised on the normative level in an
application-neutral way by decoupling the
operational level?
– What follows classic logistics process chain
management if processes are implemented on an
ad-hoc basis?
4.

What change will there be in the KPIs for
logistics optimisation?
For some time now, the dynamic nature of modern
logistics processes has led to a situation in which
isolated monitoring of individual KPIs is increasingly
problematic and, above all, in which the static
assessment of fixed, company-specific target figures
can be highly misleading. In supply chains that had
previously been optimised all too systematically, the
disruption of supply chains due to occurrences such
as environmental disasters has resulted in severe
production losses. Unforeseen changes to the load
profile or in the structure of goods have even resulted
load scenario.
It was not least this factor that gave rise to the
realisation that the definition of target values must be
more comprehensive on the whole and, above all, be
case-specific and flexible. In view of the imminent
paradigm shift with a departure from deterministic
decision-making structures and largely preplanned routines in production and distribution, this
development will pick up even greater pace.
Current KPIs, concepts and organisational approaches
will not be simply transferrable to the new control
models and philosophies that are being discussed across
a broad front. It will only be possible to generate the
targeted value added if, alongside the interconnection
technology, the logic for decisionmaking processes
such as the determination of priorities or starting times
is also optimised and developed further. This opens up
a whole new area in which our current knowledge is
only rudimentary.
As is to be expected, the efficiency of decentral
and autonomous decision processes also depends on
the required time response. An overly rigid advance
timing schedule would probably provide little leeway
for the creation of effective ad-hoc organisations or
value added networks. Another factor that deserves
in-depth analysis is the provision of buffer times (and
also physical buffer positions) and the interplay with
the required system flexibility. On the whole, therefore,
it is to be assumed that additional KPIs will have to be
incorporated in the process and that this will lead to a
shift in the established weightings.
Logistics planning and control have always gone hand
in hand with multi-criterion optimisation. The currently
dominant underlying and overriding parameters –
namely, throughput time, stock volume and capacity
utilisation – must therefore be supplemented by
additional parameters, including flexibility-focused
KPIs. The goal is to identify suitable assessment scales
that can depict the interplay between the contradictory
indicators in the desired manner.
Two of the topical questions in this area are:
– Which models and concepts can be used to arrive
at a comprehensive assessment of the interplay
between new technologies and new KPIs or
requirements?
– Which relevant KPIs should be included in
this process in future? What is the relationship
between classic KPIs like stocks and throughput
time on the one hand and flexibility indicators like
the dimensional or service spectrum?
5.

How will the targeted control and planning
of interconnected autonomous groups of
actors with special interests be regulated?
To date, the discussion of the topic “Industry 4.0” has
primarily focused on concepts in the area of big data
and the Internet of Things. The merging of information
logistics and physical logistics in cyberphysical systems

5

opens up totally new technical perspectives for the
organisation and operation of complex, flexible value
added networks. In contrast, there has been far less
emphasis on questions concerning the organisational
structuring and the management of these systems – but
it is the interconnection of widely differing resources
and actors that constitutes the very core of Industry 4.0.
All this is based on the idea of flexibly
interconnected, decentral production capacities,
autonomously communicating and acting objects and
infrastructures, and the front-to-end integration of
physical and information-based systems. These kinds
of developments increase the complexity of the systems
exponentially, however. As a result, established,
conventional methods for the planning and control
of production and logistics systems are reaching the
limits of their capability. This applies not only to
intralogistics but also and in particular within the
context of cross-company supply chain management
and the development of logistics infrastructures.
Conventional logistics systems must be developed into
“logistics service value networks” [13] – and this poses
fundamental technical and organisational challenges.
In value added networks, autonomous actors work
together to produce and distribute components of
complex services that are combined (in modular
fashion) to generate the benefit for the customer. The
design and coordination of these kinds of distributed
service systems is one of the major challenges for
logistics in the interconnected industry of the future.
Against this backdrop, one of the key questions
concerns the development of interaction between
humans and technology in logistics in this changed
environment. Human (inter-)action will continue
to be a decisive factor, particularly in decentral and
increasingly (IT) technology-driven logistics systems.
The development and utilisation of the potential
offered by distributed (“virtual”) logistics systems is
driven by the intra-company and, to an even greater
degree, the cross-company coordination of the
utilisation of distributed resources, capacities and
processes as “services” by (vertical and horizontal)
value added partners, based on highly developed and
typically web-based information and communication
systems. The central challenges lie in the “neutral”
design of platforms for the common and decentrally
coordinated utilisation of these kinds of distributed
resources and in the definition of rules and processes
for the organisation of these platforms. Logistics
service providers can play a central role in this process,
in which the integration of IT and physical logistics will
be key. The economic characteristics of these systems
with their many widely differing and sometimes
competing stakeholders will determine the acceptance
and success of these systems. Logistics 4.0 will be the
central element in this respect.
This raises numerous individual questions – which
to date have only been addressed tangentially at most
– How can “market mechanisms” and the
governance of multiple stakeholders be organised
and implemented as the central precondition for
efficient business models in Logistics 4.0?
– How can standardisation and modularisation
be employed to master the complexity of
informational and physical logistics structures and
processes?
– In view of decentrally available information,
how can economic concepts and coordination
mechanisms be developed for horizontal logistics
collaborations and marketplaces that can be
applied in real-life decision-making situations
with wide-ranging restrictions and that are geared
towards the targeted improvement in the utilisation
of logistics resources?
6.

How must the goals and rules be defined,
transferred and implemented in the
distributed and autonomous systems of
Logistics 4.0?
The development of hierarchically planned and centrally
controlled logistics systems towards coordinated,
decentral and self-controlling autonomous systems
fundamentally changes the relationship between the
strategic (or normative) and the operational level. The
targeted coordination of decentral systems requires
the stipulation of rules and mechanisms to ensure that
the decisions that are made decentrally complement
each other to form a consistent overall concept. Here,
the aim is to define rules on the normative (planning)
level that ensure coordination of the operational and
decentral decisions of the autonomous actors (and
objects) with the aim of achieving agreed, overriding
objectives (control). The decentral actors must accept
these overriding rules, as they are the prerequisite for
effective coordination. This presupposes agreement on
their characteristics [14].
Target criteria and rules have already been
developed in many technically dominated, distributed
logistics systems using multi-agent systems, above
all in the field of intralogistics. The concept of swarm
intelligence and learning-capable autonomous logistics
systems is also increasingly the subject of research
and is already being successfully applied. The more,
however, that cross-company logistics systems
with distributed resources and processes as well as
multiple actors with potentially diverging economic
objectives come into play, the greater the challenge of
developing economic goals and rules and of ensuring
the economic functionality of distributed logistics
systems – regardless of technical effectiveness and
efficiency – in the organisation and control of Logistics
4.0 systems. The efficiency and effectiveness potential
of distributed logistics resources, and above all the
flexible use of these resources on demand, can only be
exploited on the basis of agreed economic rule systems.

In recent times, above all in the field of macroeconomic
research, major importance has been attached to
developing so-called market mechanisms, which are
used in many forms based on the concept of “market
design”. There is major potential here, specifically for
the design of distributed logistics systems. Agreeing
on these types of market mechanisms is a complex
process, particularly in complex value added networks
with multiple, economically independent actors with
potentially diverging objectives and interests; at the
same time, however, it is precisely this agreement that
constitutes a central element in the success of Logistics
4.0 [15].
Against this backdrop, the following individual
questions concern some of the basic issues that need
to be addressed:
– Which actors will take up the initiative in the
development of these regulating systems and
define the criteria for participation and the proper
functioning of the regulating mechanisms?
– How can we succeed in ensuring the compatibility
of the heterogeneous objectives of the participants
in distributed logistics systems?
– How can the potential conflict between central
objective and rule definition on the one hand, and
decentral autonomy on the other, be handled and
structured using economic principles and models?
7.

What will the transition from classic,
deterministic, hierarchical supply chain
planning and control to heterarchical,
probabilistic ad-hoc planning and control
activities in Logistics 4.0 look like?
The traditional idea of planning, controlling
and monitoring logistics networks holistically
(hierarchically) is designed to achieve the optimum
overall outcome across company borders. The extreme
case of integration – from the raw material supplier
all the way through to the consumer – is geared
towards the centralised planning and coordination
of all entities involved in the value added process.
However, the resulting complexity above all negatively
impacts on the robustness of the systems. It is almost
impossible to neutralise system failures, which can
then threaten overall functionability. Structural
disruptions and economic crises result in increased
volatility, uncertainty and complexity, and reduce
the predictability of logistics operations. In order to
ensure efficient logistics even in the highly dynamic
and volatile scenarios encountered in Industry 4.0, one
factor that also needs to be investigated is the situationspecific need to reduce the level of integration of all
too narrowly and rigidly coupled systems and of the
resulting highly vulnerable value added networks
– and thereby to determine whether measures such
as targeted risk management designed to decouple
logistics systems are more likely to achieve the goals
create value added networks to organise the systems
of autonomous actors that are geared towards the
exchange of information and collaboration and that
are only loosely connected. The answer to the question
of which degree of coordination and integration is to
be targeted and is meaningful depends on the specific
situation in the value added networks. A principle of
total integration is neither desirable nor practicable.
In this connection, particular importance is attached
to increasing adaptivity. Value added networks must
be seen as complex adaptive systems with intensive
communication and interdependencies between
their entities, processes and resources. Associated
system characteristics include non-linearity, complex
multidimensional behaviour, evolutionarity and selforganisation. But these systems need coordination
and decision mechanisms in order to permit adaptive
and collective behaviour in autonomous, decentralised
contexts. It is no longer possible to achieve the
inherent complexity of these kinds of networks
through maximum possible integration, in other
words centralised planning and control. [17] It is only
logical that what is required is a paradigm shift in
logistics systems towards the decentralised control of
“intelligent” objects in heterarchical structures – rather
than, following the traditional mindset – the centralised
control of “non-intelligent” objects in hierarchical
structures. [18], [19]
The reorientation of logistics in science and practice
towards intelligently coordinated, distributed, more
decentrally organized constellations of autonomous
subsystems constitutes a not inconsiderable change in
focus of logistics organisational principles and criteria.
Nonetheless, there are already a wide range of research
approaches, albeit with very different designations, that
are based on similar principles and that can serve as
valuable points of reference for the further research and
development of complex adaptive logistics systems.
The central individual questions in this regard
include the following:
– How can contrasting strengths and weaknesses,
potentials and risks of integrated and distributed
systems be assessed more effectively in the context
of Logistics 4.0, and what would an optimum
situation-dependent balance look like?
– How can logistics systems be organised and
controlled as complex adaptive systems at the
interface of technology and the economy?
8.

Will Logistics 4.0 result in different
principles for resource utilisation (“share
economy”)?
Logistics systems have always been geared towards
increased efficiency. The operation of logistics systems
often entails high investment (e.g. for facilities such
as warehouses or hubs as well as transport fleets
comprising vehicles, conveying systems, aircraft,
rolling stock, locomotives, ships etc.). Whether

7

efficiency targets can be achieved therefore also
largely depends on the degree of utilisation of existing
capacity. [20], [21], [22]
As a result of a wide range of system-internal
and system-external framework conditions (such as
volatility of demand, social legislation, imbalances
and information deficits), it is almost impossible to
avoid idle capacities in traditional logistics systems.
Although electronic freight exchanges promote the
rapid matching of supply and demand in road freight
transport and therefore improve capacity utilisation
at specific points, they are nevertheless focused on
the utilisation potential of a resource that can be
assigned to exactly one owner. There is no provision
for the common, overriding optimisation of resources
belonging to multiple owners.
The failed city logistics projects from the 1990s show
that the joint use of logistics resources (in this case,
above all trucks and storage space) has, for various
reasons, not been a success to date. The issue of how
close to real time it is possible to compile a status
overview of orders and available resources was not
the only question that remained unanswered. What
was also unclear is what logic is needed to assign
existing orders to available (transport) resources of
different owners / actors, and how the corresponding
“contribution mechanisms” should be designed. As a
result, traditional optimisation approaches still focus
on utilisation of in-house resources.
With the help of realtime data and using cyberphysical systems, Logistics 4.0 permits interruptionfree, interconnected communication within flows of
goods and products. [23], [24], [25]
Communication in Logistics 4.0 concerns people
(e.g. drivers, schedulers, management personnel in
the logistics sector), logistics objects (e.g. goods and
products, containers, packaging, pallets), logistics
processes (e.g. transport, transshipment, storage, order
picking), logistics vehicles and logistics facilities (e.g.
terminals, hubs). Containers are fitted with digital
equipment, rendering status information globally
available in real time. In the field of road freight
transport, shipment-based scheduling systems are
linked up to vehicle-based telematics. The intelligent
processing, interlinking, evaluation and utilisation of
data for logistics decisions (big data) is seen as the
enabler of Logistics 4.0. [26], [27]
This means that the preconditions for a “share
economy” in logistics appear to be in place: ICT
solutions permit common access to data by business
partners (e.g. logistics service providers, shippers,
subcontractors) via the cloud in real time. This data
can include sender-related and recipient-related order
statuses as well as available resources – all on the
relevant timelines. This creates the tools needed to
align orders to the available resources of different
implementation of a “share economy”:
– How can quality/service standards be ensured if
logistics services are created with “distributed”
resources?
– Which priority rules are suitable for deciding
which resource should be used for which order
and when, and how are these rules to be applied?
– Which governance models can be used to operate a
“share economy” in logistics? In particular, it must
be borne in mind that operation of the platform
(including the decision on the distributed use of
resources) directly affects resource utilisation and
therefore the economic success position of the
actors.
– What standards need to be met by a “contribution
system” based on the provision of logistics services
for a “share economy”, and how can such a system
be structured?
– Which areas/logistics services are particularly
predestined for a “share economy”?
– What criteria does compliance have to fulfil in
a “share economy” in logistics? Where are the
weaknesses – with regard to data access and data
protection, for example?
– What is the nature of the trade-off between the
sharing of information (“privacy”) and efficiency
gains? What does this trade-off depend on? In the
case of large-scale reciprocal effects: what does
this mean for the distribution of public sector and
private sector tasks?

9.

Humans and autonomous machines will
in future interact in (social) networks as
equal partners and cooperate in natural
environments. What will the sociotechnical
systems of Logistics 4.0 look like?
It is particularly in this field that technological
developments open up major potential for innovation.
A further aspect of equally central importance is
that, based on general understanding, Logistics 4.0
involves the interconnection and digital penetration
of processes but not necessarily the all-encompassing
automation of these processes. On the contrary,
the expectation is that we will see widely diverging
developmental perspectives for digitised work.
Automation technologies will by no means determine
the organisational nature of work but will always be
associated with a certain amount of creative leeway
[30].
The changes to the working world due to
interconnection and digitisation that are gradually
emerging in industry, trade and logistics already
happened some time ago in other sectors – in the
financial world, for example, with its high-frequency
stock market. In recent years, employees in these
sectors have come to terms with the new situation,
just as major parts of society as a whole have become
accustomed to the use of digital devices and social
networks as a matter of course.
This development opens up new perspectives
and opportunities, not only for the structuring and
optimisation of processes but also for integration of
the work performed by humans. Simple examples

or the performance-based and knowledge-dependent
management of people in the work process. Today, the
increasing integration of sensor technology in handling
equipment and the direct integration of this technology
in the work process permit hybrid workplaces without
the previous strict separation of work spaces or the
temporary shutdown of the corresponding automatic
functions. Among other things, this exploits the
potential to master problems and challenges in the area
of societal development (demographics) – by relieving
people of the need to perform physically demanding or
monotonous tasks, for example. In other applications,
however, human activities can also be transformed
into process-monitoring or problem-solving tasks.
The goal is to establish systems for skill development
as well as for informal learning that anticipate the
individuality of the person in question and his or her
cognitive qualities and skills (“cognitive ergonomics”).
This is the only way it will be possible to utilise the
individual creativity and flexibility of human beings in
the sociotechnical context of Logistics 4.0 in a socially
acceptable manner. The acceptance of a new “manmachine” interaction concept in the vein of Logistics
4.0 will ultimately determine its long-term success.
However, this acceptance cannot be promoted or
even forced on people from the outside but must grow
gradually over time [32]
The resulting individual questions concern the three
essential interfaces of the sociotechnical system of
Logistics 4.0 (cf. Fig. 1 above), for example:
– The technology/human interface: which activities
are meaningful and socially acceptable within the
framework of Logistics 4.0 and how are they to be
automated. People and machines act in different
time frames; how can an understanding of

9

dynamic system behaviour and an understanding
for autonomous behaviour be promoted (on both
sides)?
– The organisation/human interface: what is the
right, individual scope of management by the
system? How can human beings be meaningfully
integrated in decision-making processes?
– The organisation/technology interface: Logistics
4.0 is based on decentralisation and new principles
of autonomous control and self-organisation;
how can these principles be formulated in a
technology-compliant manner? Which methods
and algorithms should be adapted or developed
for this purpose?
10.

How will risk and responsibility be shared
and distributed (“machine responsibility”)?
In Logistics 4.0, affordable and high-powered sensors,
actuator technology and information processing enable
the machines not only to communicate with people but
also to interact, as well as to interpret and ultimately
anticipate human behaviour. Interpretation of gestures
and speech or the measurement of the human pulse
based on analysis of a video signal are just as much
part of the current state of the art as eye trackers in
cars or fitness bracelets complete with motion analysis.
Techniques and algorithms of artificial intelligence and
machine learning are increasingly gaining ground, and
their development points in the direction of autonomous
action by machines.
Machines will become “equal” partners in the social
networks of Logistics 4.0. Avatars and software agents
will represent humans in the virtual world created by
these novel social networks (cf. research question 9)
[33]. In future, “man-machine interaction” (MMI) will
increasingly resemble interaction between humans. As

high degree.
In Logistics 4.0, the corresponding technical
developments will initially extend to relatively simple
systems like intelligent containers and shelves, smart
devices and swarms of driverless transport vehicles
that will have the ability to interact with humans via
speech, gestures and the interpretation of physiological
parameters. In the longer term, these systems will
be joined by cyborgs, autonomous trucks, robots or
complex machines.
One topic that is closely related to this question is that
of context-based learning. Once again, this will concern
both parties – humans and machines. On the one hand,
this will be about how individual experience-based
knowledge is preserved and imparted by humans. On
the other hand, there is the question of how machines
learn in the context of natural environments and in
interaction with humans (e.g. artificial intelligence
techniques) [34].
It would be negligent, however, to interpret a positive
vision of the future interaction between humans and
machines as a merely technical development. Interaction
with (partially) autonomously acting machines raises
questions concerning acceptance, legal assessment and
the restructuring of the sociotechnical system up to and
including the ethical perspective.
“While MMI applications will make many injuries
and fatalities preventable in future, it is equally likely
that these applications will also cause harm to some
people [35]. In this connection, the scientific literature
also discusses the ethical and legal implications of
scenarios in which a (partly) autonomous machine
has to decide between harming two people or groups
of people – between its own passengers and other
traffic participants, for example, or between multiple
other traffic participants [36]. The faster reaction
times of MMI applications basically means that more
“damaging events” will be avoidable, and this raises
two questions: that of the legitimacy and possibly even
the legality of decisions not to use MMI solutions; and,
secondly, the question of whether this may result in
restrictions on human options for action.” [37]
The following questions are among those that need to
be answered in an interdisciplinary scientific discourse:
– How will responsible and targeted action in the
interaction of humans and machines by structured
and organised in the common social networks of
Logistics 4.0?
– What is the normative standard that machines have
to submit to in their interaction with one another
and with humans?
– What is the categorical imperative of Logistics
4.0?

11.

What qualifications and competencies does
Logistics 4.0 require? How will they be
individually fostered?
Increasing digitisation and interconnection in Logistics
4.0 creates major challenges for employees and
management personnel. With the increasing application
of advanced information and communication
technologies in logistics and production, existing work,
organisation and management structures will be called
into question by new technological concepts. Added
to this are the effects of demographic change and the
differing aptitudes, values and attitudes of the different
generations [39].
In Logistics 4.0, simple rule-based work routines
are increasingly automated. Humans and machines
work together. The employees are still responsible for
organisational, creative decisions. Smart devices like
smartphones, tablets, 3D glasses or wearables enable
the employees to manage the glut of information and
to enter into a novel dialogue with intelligent machines
and products.
What are the resulting specialist and methodological
requirements of this development with regard to the
people employed in the logistics sector? One general
specialist element will be the integration of production
and logistics knowledge on the one hand and uptodate IT skills on the other. This calls for additional
qualification measures in the area with the lower skill
levels. Concrete requirements will largely depend on
the function of the employees in question, although age
will also play a decisive role, as younger employees are
far more comfortable when it comes to using digital
technologies.
Qualification measures for personnel in the era
of Logistics 4.0 must take account of all groups of
employees – in other words, not only blue-collar staff
but also commercial employees and management
personnel, and the requirements will be different in
each case. As a result of increased automation, for
example, blue-collar employees will sometimes be
faced with the challenge of performing new tasks.
Commercial personnel will have to learn the necessary
skills that enable them to handle a more highly
automated, decentral planning and control approach.
For their part, management executives need holistic
business process and IT expertise in order to identify
and exploit the potential of Logistics 4.0 for their
company – as well as high-level skills in the area of
change management and modern employee leadership.
They must help older employees to understand the
benefits of Logistics 4.0 while simultaneously arousing
the interest of employees from Generations Y and Z
(the so-called digital natives) in their company and
managing these younger employees in an appropriate
manner. Moreover, they must create a framework
for the productive cooperation of older and younger
employees.
The resulting qualification needs must be individually
further training and development programmes.
Ongoing digitisation in the educational field also
opens up attractive new options for companies, such as
online courses, gamification or knowledge platforms.
It goes without saying that training content must also
be rapidly established in the areas of school, vocational
and university education. At the same time, however,
it is precisely the process of digitisation that also
paves the way for the development of competencies
on independent initiative outside the conventional
education pathways. This aspect should be taken
into account in the development of concepts for the
documentation of the individual qualification status for
Logistics 4.0.
In view of the above, the following are just some of
the individual questions that need to be asked:
– What specialist and methodological demands
will Logistics 4.0 make on employees in logistics
– in general and in terms of specific tasks and
functions?
– How does digitisation affect employment in
logistics, and how will this impact the supply
and demand for specialists and management
personnel?
– How can the different knowledge statuses and
working practices of the different generations
be combined in a productive way and optimally
utilised?
– How does the further training and development
system need to be adapted in order to address these
issues?
CONCLUSION
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is fundamentally
changing the face of industry and society, creating
major challenges for logistics in the reorganisation
and restructuring of value added systems. Established
business models and success factors are being called
into question, and there is a need for new ideas and
concepts.
Industry 4.0 is unthinkable without logistics. It is the
prime mover of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and
the core element of all successful concepts. Logistics
will be the key competitive and locational factor for
industry in the international competition between new
business models in the area of autonomisation and
digitisation. More than ever before, logistics research
is therefore called upon to answer the fundamental
research questions arising on the road to Logistics 4.0.
The research questions outlined in this Position
Paper underline the importance of logistics and IT as
the central knowledge areas for the implementation of
the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The wide-ranging
interrelationships between these two disciplines make
it expedient to focus above all on interdisciplinary
concepts. A further aim is to create a common

11

theoretical foundation for technology and economy in
the concept of Logistics 4.0.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Position Paper underlying this contribution is
endorsed by all the members of the Scientific Advisory
Board of Bundesvereinigung Logistik (BVL). The
authors would like to thank all members for their
valuable input to this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Delfmann W, Kersten W, ten Hompel M,
Schmidt T, Stölzle W (2017) Logistik als
Wissenschaft – zentrale Forschungsfragen in
Zeiten der vierten industriellen Revolution,
Positionspapier des Wissenschaftlichen Beirats
der Bundesvereinigung Logistik (BVL), Bremen,
ht t ps://w w w.bvl.de/ser vice/publikationen /
positionen
[2] Delfmann W, Dangelmaier W, Günthner W,
Klaus P, Overmeyer, L, Rothengatter W, Weber
J, Zentes J (2010) Towards a science of logistics:
cornerstones of a framework of understanding
of logistics as an academic discipline. Working
group of the Scientific Advisory Board of
the German Logistics Association (BVL), in:
Logistics Research (2), pp 57–63
[3] Kagermann H (2015) Change through digitization
– Value creation in the age of Industry 4.0.
Management of permanent change. Springer
Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp 23-45
[4] Evangelista P, McKinnon A, Sweeney E (2013)
Technology adoption in small and mediumsized
logistics providers. Industrial Management &
Data Systems 113.7:967-989
[5] Wagner St, Sutter R (2012) A qualitative
investigation of innovation between third-party
logistics providers and customers. International
Journal of Production Economics 140.2:944-958
[6] Schmidt R, Mohring M, Härting R, Reichstein
C (2015) Industry 4.0 – potentials for creating
smart products: empirical research results.
Abramowicz, W. (ed.) BIS. LNBIP, vol.208,
pp.16-27. Springer, Heidelberg
[7] Hermann M, Pentek T, Otto B (2016) Design
principles for industry 4.0 scenarios: A literature
review, Working Paper, Technical University of
Dortmund
[8] König A, Spinler S (2016) The effect of logistics
outsourcing on the supply chain vulnerability
of shippers: Development of a conceptual risk
management framework. The International
Journal of Logistics Management 27.1:122-141
[9] Brettel M, Friederichsen N, Keller M, Rosenberg
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

and network building change the manufacturing
landscape: An Industry 4.0 Perspective.
International Journal of Science, Engineering
and Technology; 8.1: 37-44
Hofmann, E, Rüsch, M (2017) Industry 4.0 and
the current status as well as future prospects on
logistics, Computers in Industry, 89, pp. 23–34
Zhou K, Liu T (2015) Industry 4.0: towards
future industrial opportunities and challenges.
12th international conference on Fuzzy Systems
and Knowledge Discovery (FSKD), IEE, pp.
2147-2152
Kagermann H, Wahlster W, Helbig J (ed.)
(2013) Umsetzungsempfehlungen für das
Zukunftsprojekt Industrie 4.0 – Abschlussbericht
des Arbeitskreises Industrie 4.0, acatech, Use
Case 5: Selbstorganisierende adaptive Logistik,
pp 109
Blau B. (2012) Coordination in Service Value
Networks: A Mechanism Design Approach
(Studies on eOrganisation and Market
Engineering), KIT, Karlsruhe
Delfmann W, Jaekel F (2012) The Cloud –
Logistics for the Future? In: Coordinated
Autonomous Systems. Wissenschaft und
Praxis im Dialog. 6th International Scientific
Symposium on Logistics, edited by Delfmann,
W., Wimmer, Th., Hamburg, pp 5–26
Roth A (2015) Who Gets What – And Why: The
New Economics of Matchmaking and Market
Design, New York
Delfmann W (2014) Perspektive Cloud Logistik
– Adaptiv vernetzte Logistiksysteme statt
totaler Supply Chain Integration, in: Navigation
durch die komplexe Welt der Logistik, Texte aus
Wissenschaft und Praxis zum Schaffenswerk von
Wolf-Rüdiger Bretzke, ed.: Kille, Chr., pp 5–16
Surana A, Kumara S, Greaves M, Raghavan U,
Nandini (2005) Supply chain networks: a complex
adaptive systems perspective. International
Journal of Production Research 43 (20), pp 4235–
4265
Hülsmann M, Cordes Ph (2009) Autonomous
Co-operation and Control in Complex Adaptive
Logistic Systems – Contributions and Limitations
for the Innovation Capability of International
Supply Networks, in: Lecture Notes of the Institute
for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering Volume 4, pp
1023-1032
Windt K, Hülsmann M (2007) Understanding
autonomous cooperation and control in logistics.
The impact of autonomy on management,
information, communication and material flow, in:
Hülsmann, M., Windt, K., (Eds.). Understanding
autonomous cooperation and control in logistics.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp 4-16

[20] Savelsbergh M, van Woensel T (2016) City
logistics: Challenges and Opportunities.
Transportation science 50.2 pp 579-590
[21] Grazia Speranza M (2018) Trends in transportation
and logistics. European journal of operational
research 264.3 pp 830-836
[22] Leismann K, Schmitt M, Rohn H and Baedeker
C (2013) Collaborative Consumption: Towards
a Resource-Saving Consumption Culture.
Resources 2.3 pp 184-203. doi:10.3390/
resources2030184
[23] Wang Y., Naim M., Evans L. (2013) Enabling
Smart Logistics for Service Operations. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 237-256
[24] Veit D, Clemons E, Benlian A, Buxmann P, Hess
T, Kundisch D, Leimeister J M, Loos P, Spann M
(2014) Business Models. An Information Systems
Research Agenda. Business & Information
Systems Engineering 6.1 pp 45-53
[25] Kagermann H (2015) Change Through
Digitization – Value Creation in the Age of
Industry 4.0. Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden, pp 2345
[26] Resch A, Blecker T (2012) Smart logistics: a
literature review. Pioneering Supply Chain
Design A Comprehensive Insight Into Emerging
Trends, Technologies And Applications. Eul,
Lohmar pp 91-102
[27] Grabara J, Kolcun M, Kot S (2014) The role
of information systems in transport logistics.
International Journal of Education and Research
2.2, pp 1-8
[28] Gomez M, Grand S, Givas S (2015) Digitalisation
in Logistics and the Role of Cloud Computing:
How Cloud Computing will Change the Game.”
Logistics Innovation Technologie 2, pp 4-7
[29] Zhang X, Van Donk D, van der Vaart T (2016)
The different impact of inter-organizational
and intra-organizational ICT on supply chain
performance. International Journal of Operations
& Production Management 36.7:803-824
[30] Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie
(ed.): Aspekte der Forschungsroadmap in den
Anwendungsszenarien, Plattform Industrie 4.0,
Berlin, 2016, p. 34
[31] Hirsch-Kreinsen H, ten Hompel M (2016)
Social Manufacturing and Logistics –
Arbeit in der digitalisierten Produktion. In:
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie
(ed.): Arbeiten in der digitalen Welt, Berlin, pp
6-9
[32] Grunwald
A
(2015)
Gesellschaftliche
Risikokonstellationen für autonomes Fahren –
Analyse, Einordnung und Bewertung. in: Maurer,
M. et al. (ed.), Autonomes Fahren, Technische,
rechtliche und gesellschaftliche Aspekte, Berlin,
pp 661 – 685
[33] ten Hompel M, Putz M, Nettsträter S (2016)

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

Für ein positives Zukunftsbild von Industrie
4.0. Dortmund Available online at: www.e3produktion.de
acatech (ed.): Kompetenzentwicklung Industrie
4.0 – Erste Ergebnisse und Schlussfolgerungen.
p. 30, Reihe acatech Dossier, Berlin, April 2016.
www.acatech.de/de/projekte/projekte/kompetenz
entwicklungsstudie-industrie-40.htm
acatech (ed.): Innovationspotenziale der MenschMaschine-Interaktion
(acatech
IMPULS),
Munich, 2016. ISSN: 2195-1829 / ISBN: 978-38316-4497-1
Lin P (2015) Why Ethics Matters for
Autonomous Cars. In: Maurer, M. et al. (ed.),
Autonomes Fahren, Technische, rechtliche und
gesellschaftliche Aspekte, Berlin, pp 69–85
Spindler G (2014) Zivilrechtliche Fragen beim
Einsatz von Robotern. In: Hilgendorf, E. (ed.),
Robotik im Kontext von Recht und Moral, BadenBaden, pp 63–80
Zimmerli W (1993) Wandelt sich Verantwortung
mit technischem Wandel? In: Hans Lenk, Günter
Ropohl (ed.): Technik und Ethik. 2nd edition.
Reclam, Stuttgart, pp 92–111
Kersten W, Koller H, Lödding H (ed.) (2014)
Industrie 4.0 – Wie intelligente Vernetzung und
kognitive Systeme unsere Arbeit verändern,
Berlin

