Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13243-017-0041-7
RESEARCH

Investigation into the mechanical and thermal properties
of poly(methyl methacrylate) recovered from light
guidance panels with a focus on future remanufacturing
and sustainable waste management
Sunil S Suresh 1 & Smita Mohanty 1 & Sanjay K Nayak 1

Received: 4 August 2017 / Accepted: 3 November 2017 / Published online: 15 November 2017
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., part of Springer Nature 2017

Abstract The potential of light guidance panels (LGPs) in the field of recycling technology
has not explored to meet its full efficiency in the recovering of polymeric component from it.
As consequences such components are either incinerated or used for land filling purposes.
Therefore, this work aims to address the recycling and reutilization of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) recovered from light guidance panels used in the liquid crystal displays (LCDs).
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis, resin identification code (RIC) and density
methods confirm the presence of PMMA as the major polymer used in LGPs. Additionally,
energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDAX) analysis reveals the absence of heavy metals and
flame retardants in collected PMMA. Furthermore, mechanical, thermal and morphological


Introduction
Nowadays, displays used in the electrical and electronic equipments (EEE) shows progressive
developments associated with technological explosion and market expansion. In the earlier
stages of electronic industries, cathode ray tubes (CRT) were used as the main device for
displaying images in computers, television and so on [1, 2]. The rapid revolution in the EEE
sector also resulted changes in the display size, shape, and quality of image. The introduction
of the most advanced liquid crystal display (LCD) lead into the replacement of the old CRT
technology due to its improved picture quality with lesser energy efficiency [3, 4]. At the
present context LCD monitors are predominantly used in the computers and televisions since
they can produce more realistic, clear and sharper colours within the thinner, flat and light
weight panels [5, 6].
The LCD monitors are associated with different materials such as plastic casings, light
guide assembly, printed circuit board and metallic frames. LCD monitors hold general
structure, though its contents may vary with manufactures to manufactures. Kopacek [7]
reported that LCDs contains different components such as glass plates, polarizer, electrode,
liquid crystals, colour filter layer and backlight unit. Moreover, the study also pointed out,
LCD products possibly contain toxic elements such as mercury or cadmium therefore an
efficient method should be applied during recycling. Furthermore, studies over the LCD
monitor disassembly analysis indicate presence of various heterogeneous materials such as
glass, metals, and different polymeric materials wherein, glass substrate and plastic materials
extensively contribute around 47 wt% and 25 wt% respectively [8–10]. Light guide assembly
present in the LCDs contains optical grade PMMA material as LGP [11–13].
LGPs are thin and light transmittance polymeric material occupied with microstructures like
V-cut grooves or dot array in a regular pattern those can direct light uniformly all over the area
of the panel. The methods such as injection moulding, dot-matrix holographic interference,
UV embossing or hot embossing techniques are commonly used for production of microstructure in the panels [14]. Considerable impact resistance, easy processability, minimal light
scattering and high light transmittance behaviour of PMMA make it suitable for LGPs.
The advancement in the technology gradually reduces the life cycle of the product
gradually. It has been estimated that LCDs have average lifespan of 3–5 years, and which
tends to reduce therefore a huge amount of LCD screens were into the waste dumping yard in
nearby years [15, 16]. Conventionally, the metals have good value for the recycling and non

219

As per the European Commission, waste components are considered as the main recourses
to diminish the dependence on the import of raw materials [18–20]. Consequently the recycled
polymeric components from the LCDs can be useful for production of new products, which
can replaces the usage of virgin materials. Recycling of end-of-life products are considered as a
sequence of procedures, which include collection, segregation and re-processing of materials
into useful products which have properties less or similar to its parent materials previously
employed in products [19, 21]. Peeters et al. [22] conducted a case study over various waste
treatment strategies over end-of-life flat screens, and they have reached a conclusion that
recycling rate can be achieved by improving pre-processing operation such as dismantling, product sorting and clustering. Several studies have been conducted on the
recycling possibilities of PMMA materials. In an interesting study by Sundin et al.
[23] indicates application of parts recovered from LCD monitors for manufacturing of
lamp parts, additionally, modified recovered parts are found to be significantly applicable for flash materials. A detailed study over the PMMA materials collected from
the LCDs has been done by Kikuchi et al. [11, 12] and exemplified the possibility of
recovering methyl methacrylate (MM) monomer using pyrolysis technique. Similarly,
Popescu et al. [24] made a study on depolymerisation of PMMA into MM and
thereafter prepared PMMA material using same depolymerised MM monomer. In a
different study Gouli et al. [15] utilized PMMA decorative sheet for solvent recycling
using toluene as a solvent and n-hexane as an anti-solvent in order to reprecipite, and
achieved r-PMMA grains have properties similar to that of virgin PMMA materials.
However, considering the environmental impact of the pyrolysis and solvent recycling
methods, mechanical recycling found superior position in E-waste recycling
techniques.
Although much effort has been done on the recycling possibilities of the PMMA, literatures
based on the mechanical recycling for further product formulation for PMMA components are
limited. Moreover, polymer disposal methods such as incineration and landfilling causes
environmental problems, therefore significant mechanical recycling methods should be encouraged. As considering above facts, current research is focused on the mechanical recycling
as well as reprocessing ability of the PMMA components collected from the LCD screen,
which are considered as the main fraction of waste electrical and electronic equipment
(WEEE) stream. Thus we are providing a small platform for mechanical recycling possibilities
of PMMA materials and further produced recycled material could be used in larger
manufacturing processes in near future.

Methodology
Sample collection
The waste LGP samples used for the present investigation which was previously used in
the LCD monitor was collected from a certified E-waste recycling centre, E-Parisaraa,
Bengaluru, India. The LGP were selected since it is the one of major waste stream that
comes from the LCD and LED monitors of IT electronic equipments and consumer

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233

having melt flow index value of 2.2 g/10 min were purchased from the Shah polymers,
India, inorder to make a comparative analysis with the polymeric material present in the
LGP of the LCD screen.

Sample preparation
The waste LGP panels collected were shredded into small pieces employing plastic
granulator Arun enterprises. The obtained grains were cleaned and kept in a vacuum
oven for 6 h at 50 °C to eliminate moisture/water content from the samples.
Subsequently both virgin and r-PMMA granules were extruded using twin screw micro
compounder X-plore 15 mL. The temperature for the consecutive zones of chamber was
kept at 195, 190 and 190 °C respectively, with screw rotation speed of 60 rpm. The
obtained extrudate was collected and injection moulded into impact and tensile specimens using mini injection jet (X-plore) at a mould temperature and melt temperature of
40 °C and 190 °C respectively. The mould pressure was kept at a constant value of 140psi throughout the sample preparation.

Instrumentation
Physiochemical analysis
FTIR- attenuated total reflectance (ATR) analysis Recovered LGP polymers were
analysed using FTIR-ATR spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, Thermofisher) inorder to identify the
polymeric material present in it. Similarly, FTIR-ATR measurement was conducted on virgin
PMMA material for comparing and evaluating changes in the functional groups of recycled
material. All the FTIR spectra were obtained at 4 cm−1 resolution within the range of 400–
4000 cm−1.
Density analysis A set of 15 replicated pre-dried samples were examined for calculating
density and an average of obtained values were represented as final density value. The density
of each of the materials was studied according to ASTM D792 standards. Further, the obtained
density value of r-PMMA was compared with v-PMMA.

Mechanical property evaluation
Izod notched impact strength of the specimens was conducted by impactometer (Tinius
Olsen) with specimen dimension of 63.5 × 12.7 × 3 mm as per ASTM D 256 standard. All
the specimens were notched prior to experiment using notch cutter Ceast, at an angle of
45° and a depth of 2.54 mm. Average values of five specimens were represented as final
impact value.
Tensile test was conducted using a universal testing machine, Instron (3382), at room
temperature. The UTM equipped with 10 kN load cell operated at a cross section speed
of 10 mm/min. Tensile tests were conducted on five specimens, according to ASTM D

221

room temperature. Flexural properties were also conducted in the same UTM machine
using three point bending mode according to ASTM D 790 standards.

Surface hardness analysis
Surface hardness of the specimens were measured using durometer as per ASTM D 2240
standards. The samples were placed in a flat surface and hardness value was measured by
penetrating indentor in the durometer in the different places of the samples. Shore D
harnesses of each specimen were calculated after taking the average value from 15
measurements.

Elemental and morphological analysis
Morphological analysis of the LGPs sheet, impact fractured surface for both v-PMMA
and r-PMMA was carried out using environmental scanning electron microscopy
(ESEM) Quanta 250, with an accelerating voltage of 1 Kv. Similarly elemental
composition of the r-PMMA and v-PMMA was analysed with the help of same
instrument attached with energy dispersive spectrometer, for identification of presence
of any restricted toxic elements.

Torque rheometer analysis
Processability analysis of the materials was studied using Haake rheocord 600, having
the 69 cm3 mixing chamber with roller type of mixing blade. 60 g of samples were used
to fill up the mixing chamber as according to material density. The rotation of the mixing
blade and temperature for mixing was kept as 60 rpm and 190 °C and mixed for 8 min.
The maximum torque level and energy curve produced during experiments were
identified.

Thermal characterisations
Differential scanning calorimetry measurements were performed using DSC Q20, TA
instruments. Approximately 7 mg of samples were subjected to first heating scan from
room temperature to 180 °C, held for 5 min to eliminate the earlier thermal history
followed by cooling to 30 °C at a rate of 10 °C/ min and reheated again to 200 °C at the
heating rate of 10 °C/ min.
Thermogravimetric of waste plastic material was evaluated by TGA, Q50, TA instrument. About 7 mg of samples were heated from 30 °C to 550 °C, at a rate of 10 °C/min
under the inert atmosphere of nitrogen. The weight changes of the plastic material at
different temperature were recorded.
Heat deflection temperature (HDT) measurement of the specimens were analysed
according to ASTM D 648 standard. The sample deformation was recorded as a function
of temperature at a constant load of 0.46 MPa on centre of sample with dimension 127 ×
13 × 3 mm. The analysis temperature was increased from 25 °C to 150 °C at a heating rate

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233

Table 1 Type of tests conducted over r-PMMA and v-PMMA with its specimen nature
Type of test conducted

Specimen nature

Test standard

FTIR-ATR
Density

–
ASTM D 792

Elemental/ morphology
analysis
Torque analysis
DSC and TGA

Cleaned and dried polymer granules.
Pre-dried polymer granules, average of 15
samples were taken as final value.
Solid block specimen with dimension of
63.5 × 12.7 × 3 mm.
Solid block specimen with dimension of
165 × 12.7 × 3 mm.
Solid block specimen with dimension of
127 × 12.7 × 3 mm.
Analysis conducted over surface of specimens
formed after injection moulding.
Surface of LGPs and fractured surface
of specimens.
60 g of plastic granules.
~7 mg of specimens.

HDT

127 × 13 × 3 mm solid block of specimen.

Izod notched impact
strength
Tensile property
Flexural property
Shore-D hardness

ASTM D 256
ASTM D 638
ASTM D 790
ASTM D 2240
–
–
ASTM D 3418 & ASTM E
1131 for DSC and TGA
respectively.
ASTM D 648

Results and discussion
Identification of polymeric material present in the light guidance panel
Identification of the polymeric material present in the LGP was made through various
techniques such as RIC, density analysis and FTIR analysis. During the sorting procedure it
was found that around 82% of the LGPs contain RIC code, whereas remaining samples does
not mentioned about the type of polymer used in it. Figure 1 represents digital image of LGP
collected from LCD carrying RIC code. PMMA is commonly used for production of LGPs
due to its superior optical properties and anti-ageing behaviour. In addition to the RIC, density
analysis of the recovered material was conducted sequentially for further confirmation of the

223

± 0.03 g/cm3) as compared to its v-PMMA material (1.189 ± 0.01 g/cm3). The difference in the
density value of the recycled material may possibly be associated with degradation of
molecular chain.
FTIR-ATR is a fast and non-destructive technique inorder to analyse the recycled material
from the WEEE products, which can provide details about the various chemical functional
groups present in the materials [25]. As it can be seen from Fig. 2, FTIR spectra of both vPMMA and r-PMMA have almost similar characteristic molecular vibration. Table 2 represent
various transmittance values obtained during the FTIR analysis for v-PMMA and r-PMMA,
which are compared with transmittance value specified in previous literatures [26, 27].
However, in the case of r-PMMA, some of spectra show changes in the amplitude and
position. The intense triplet peak around 3140–2770 cm−1 can be attributed to various alkane
molecular motions present in the PMMA. The peak associated with carbonyl (−C = O)

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233

Table 2 Molecular vibration & its
corresponding wave numbers obtained for v-PMMA and r-PMMA

Wave number Wave number Molecular vibrational modes
(cm−1) for v- (cm−1) for rPMMA
PMMA
3017
2927
2854
1723
1490
1460
1386
1196
1132
987

2995
2949
2848
1718
1480
1431
1386
1190
1129
985

-CH3 stretching vibration
-CH2 Symmetric stretching
-CH2 asymmetric stretching vibration
-C = O stretching vibration
-C-H asymmetric vibration
-C-H deformation
-C-H symmetric vibration
-OCH3 stretching vibration
-C-O-C symmetric stretching
C-C stretching vibration

Besides, the intensity of carbonyl peak was enhanced for the r-PMMA. The changes in these
peaks are probably associated with chain deterioration during previous life cycle or processing
period. The region 1502–1399 cm−1 contains a doublet peak that arises from various –C-H
deformations, associated with main chain methylene (CH2) group, methyl carbonyl group as
well as methyl pendent group present in the structure of PMMA. Moreover, the peak at the
region 1348–1049 cm−1 gives clear idea about the acrylic group in the material. In addition to
above stated procedures, near infrared technique could be useful in identification of r- PMMA
component from LCDs since they are transparent in nature [22].

Estimation of mechanical properties of recovered PMMA polymer from LGPs
The comparison of mechanical strength of v-PMMA and r-PMMA were tabulated in Table 3.
In the case of PMMA chain rigidity arises from pendant side groups. The polymeric chains of
PMMA cannot come close together because the bulky side group such as methyl and
methoxy-methyl. That results in high rigidity as well as brittle behaviour of material as
compared with other polymeric materials. It is evident from Table 3 that, there is a significant
reduction (72.39%) of notched impact strength of r-PMMA as compared with v-PMMA. The
reduction in the impact strength is possibly allied with formation of shorter polymer chains via
chain breaking during ageing as well as service period of the product. The FTIR studies also

Table 3 Comparison of mechanical strength of v-PMMA and r-PMMA
Parameter

value

Notched impact strength (J/m)
Surface hardness (Shore D)
Tensile strength (MPa)
Elongation-at-break (%)
Tensile Modulus (MPa)
Flexural strength (MPa)
Flexural modulus (MPa)

v-PMMA
26.15 ± 0.8
82.3 ± 5
54.23 ± 1.2
10.99 ± 0.4
1231 ± 15
66.34 ± 18
1123 ± 23

(− sign implicate decrease in percentage)

Percentage of change in r-PMMA
value compared with v-PMMA
r-PMMA
7.22 ± 0.09
92 ± 2
59.88 ± 1.2
4.84 ± 0.07
2499 ± 45
84 ± 15
2289 ± 40

−72.39
11.79
10.42
−55.96

225

point towards possibilities of chain deterioration in PMMA polymer chains. Similarly, rPMMA indicates elongation-at-break value of 4.84 ± 0.07%, which shows 55.96% reduction
as compared with v-PMMA. This reduction in the elongation-at-break is probably related with
ageing of polymeric chains or in thermal processing so that polymeric chains undergo chain
scission which could result in breakdown of polymer chains. Additionally, as discussed by Bai
et al. [28] reduction in the mechanical properties during the mechanical recycling procedures
also depends on the phenomenon like loss of small volatile molecule during melt processing.
However, as compared to the v-PMMA, recycled material shows an increase of 11.79% in
surface hardness value. Similar behaviour was also shown for tensile modulus and tensile
strength of the r-PMMA materials, which shows 10.42 and 103.01% of increment in tensile
modulus and strength respectively. The increase in both tensile modulus and strength indicates
significant loss of elasticity or achievement of chain rigidity of the polymeric materials on
recycling procedure. During the mechanical recycling there is a possibility for polymer chain
scission, as explained previously which leads to the formation of macro-radicals, such formed
macromolecular species undergoes cross-linking with various macromolecular species as a
result significant amounts of unsaturation are developed in the polymeric chains, subsequently,
this phenomenon would results in enhancement of tensile properties. The similar behaviour of
material cause increased values of flexural strength and modulus.

SEM-EDAX analysis
Presence of certain hazardous materials such as brominated flame retardants or heavy metals
opposes the mechanical recycling as well as reprocessing of plastics recovered from WEEE
[18, 29, 30]. However EDAX analysis performed on the r-PMMA material indicates that they
does not contains any brominated flame retardants and other toxic elements as discussed by
Kopacek [7], which suggest the recycling possibilities of the r-PMMA without any toxic
concern. Figure 3 represents EDAX spectrum for both virgin and recycled PMMA material.
Similarly, Table 4 illustrate the elemental composition of r-PMMA and v-PMMA obtained
after EDAX analysis. It is evident from Table 4 that, r-PMMA contain higher amount of
oxygen element as compared with v-PMMA, which is probably associated with result of

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233

Table 4 Elemental composition of v-PMMA and r-PMMA
Elemental composition (wt%)

Carbon

Oxygen

v-PMMA
r-PMMA

68.15
61.83

31.85
38.17

Moreover, the morphological analysis of the material was conducted over r-PMMA sheet
and impact fractured specimens. Figure 4a represents SEM of recovered PMMA sheet (light
guidance panel) which indicate a number of dots like array structure in regular fashion. The
projections formed due to the array structure helps light guidance panel to direct light
homogeneously all over the panel. Other than the array region rest of the place shows
homogenous plane surface nature. Conversely r-PMMA material after reprocessing and impact
analysis shows brittle behaviour, (Fig. 4b) in which a number of cracks are propagated along
the surface of the material. Besides, r-PMMA specimens exhibit some mirror zone in the
polymer matrix. The SEM image of the v-PMMA (Fig. 4c) after impact analysis shows
homogenous surface behaviour however as compared with r-PMMA material, v-PMMA
specimen shows very lesser number of crack propagations.

227

Reprocessability analysis of r-PMMA
The reprocessability of the r-PMMA materials recovered from the LGP was assessed with the
help of a torque rheometer since they can give useful information about torque, flow behaviour
of polymer and the structural changes occurs during processing [31]. Figure 5a represents the
torque-time curve for r-PMMA and v-PMMA at 60 rpm and the chamber temperature was set
to 190 °C inorder to avoid further thermal degradation of material. The torque values for both
materials exemplified a sharp peak in the primary stage of the (0–1.5 min) rheogram, which is
due to the resistance offered by the PMMA material to the rotating screws of rheometer. The
second stage (1.5–8 min) of the rheogram exhibit a fall in the curve and a consistent value has
reached after 3 min indicating a homogeneous mixing of the polymer melt.
The v-PMMA material shows 39.30 Nm and 5.22 Nm higher maximum torque value and
average torque value respectively, though a contrary higher result was shown by r-PMMA for
higher maximum torque value (45.40 Nm) and average torque value (10.59 Nm). r-PMMA
material shows higher torque value as compared with the v-PMMA, which is perhaps due to
chain stiffness of materials, or various fillers incorporated during its previous life cycle, as the
small amount of the fillers can moderately influence the torque value [32]. However, possibility for presence of such fillers is void in our case since PMMA materials used in LGPs are
used without any additives inorder to maintain its superior optical clarity. Additionally, EDAX
measurements do not indicate presence of any other elements rather than carbon and oxygen.
The Fig. 5b specify information about energy as a function of time, which shows similar
results as reflected in torque versus time curve, where r-PMMA shows higher energy than vPMMA possibly attributed due to structural rigidity of r-PMMA achieved due to degradation
during previous cycle. Moreover, after reprocessing colour of r-PMMA has changed into

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233

Fig. 6 a TGA curve of r-PMMA and v-PMMA b Derivative TGA curve of r-PMMA and v-PMMA

opaque behaviour. A very similar result was obtained by Popescu et al. [24] over chemically
recycled PMMA products. As a consequence reprocessed PMMA cannot be useful in production of materials seeking optical applications.

Thermogravimetric analysis
The thermal stability of the r-PMMA recovered from the LGP of the computer LCD
display and its v-PMMA were represented in the Fig. 6. It is obvious from the TGA
curves, that r-PMMA materials shows higher thermal stability than virgin materials.
As it can be seen from the DTG curve, v-PMMA materials exhibit maximum
degradation temperature at 339.7 °C. Similarly, r-PMMA materials shows single
DTG curve with the maximum degradation temperature at 396.4 °C.
The major degradation of the both v-PMMA and PMMA takes place around 275–
400 °C. The PMMA chains degrade via end chain scission and random scission [33]
as per the mechanism shown in the Fig. 7. The backbone chain in the PMMA
undergoes random scission (reaction I) resulting the formation of primary and tertiary
radical (isobutyryl macro radical (IBM)). IBM further undergoes β-homolytic bond
cleavage (reaction II) into methylmethacrylate monomer (depolymerised product) and
another new tertiary radical. Tertiary radical formed recombine with other mobile free
radicals leading to termination of the radical chain (reaction III). However, the
primary radical formed during the main chain scission does not give depolymerised
product as like the IBM. Those primary radicals undergo cleavage at C-CO bond
(reaction IV) consequently form a stable methylallyl terminated PMMA chains and
methoxy carbonyl radical. Furthermore, the termination of the primary radicals was
also possible through recombination with other radicals (reaction V). Apart from it
Manring [34], discussed possibilities of random side group chain scission rather than

229

Fig. 7 Thermal degradation mechanism of PMMA

150–160 °C, nearly 1–2.4% of the weight reduction has occurred to both of the
materials during this period. It is believed to be due to the rupture of H-H bond
present in the PMMA molecular chain, since bond dissociation energy for breaking of
such bonds is considerably lower than main chain and C-C bonds due to its steric
hindrance and inductive effect offered by the vicinal ester group present in the
PMMA polymer chains [35, 36].
However, as it can be seen from the TGA and DTG curves, virgin and recycled material

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:217–233

Fig. 8 DSC thermogram for v-PMMA and r-PMMA

DSC analysis
DSC thermograms (Fig. 8) indicate a second order transition corresponding to the glass
transition temperature (Tg) values. Both virgin and recycled PMMA materials show a single
Tg value for entire temperature range. As it can be seen from the DSC thermogram, the Tg
value of the r-PMMA was observed at 100.8 °C due to the chain mobility that arises from the
polymeric material. Even though, it is less than that of v-PMMA Tg (106.8 °C) value. The
difference in the Tg value for r-PMMA compared with v-PMMA may be possibly associated
with molecular weight, change in structure, previous cross linking and degree of cross linking
during polymerization reaction [15]. In addition to it, increase in the free volume developed
due to the crosslinking during degradation could contribute to changes in the Tg values of rPMMA were compared with v-PMMA [39]. While, DSC curves for v-PMMA and r-PMMA
does not contains any first order transition, which indicates absence of melting temperature.
The absence of melting temperature in the DSC curve direct towards the amorphous behaviour
of polymer matrix [40].

Heat deflection temperature
HDT measure the ability of material to withstand short period elevated temperature while
supporting load. HDT of v-PMMA and r-PMMA recovered from LGP is depicted in Table 5,
in which value of the r-PMMA is lower as compared with that of v-PMMA. Heat deflection
behaviour of the polymeric materials depends on many factors such as composition of the
Table 5 HDT values for v-PMMA
and r-PMMA

Sample

HDT value

v-PMMA
r-PMMA

231

material, thermal and mechanical behaviours. Tg of the materials have an important role in
HDT of any polymeric materials as discussed by the Pluta et al. [41]. As discussed in the
previous section Tg of the r-PMMA shows lower value as compared with v-PMMA materials.
Therefore the lower value of HDT in the case of r-PMMA can also corroborate with higher
chain mobility. Similarly, in the case of recovered r-PMMA it may undergo various thermal
treatments during the production of light guidance panel sheet. Such previous thermal history
can significantly affect the degree of free volume and level of residual stresses in the recycled
material [42]. The reduced HDT value for r-PMMA can also be attributed with enhancement in
the free volume of recycled material due to thermal histories as mentioned above.

Conclusion
Researcher’s inquest for the recycling of polymers from WEEE component can mitigate the
environmental pollution to a certain extent by evading the landfilling and incineration of
WEEE. In this present study, PMMA used in the LGPs collected from end-of-life LCD
monitors were considered. Some studies over PMMA have been initiated by researchers and
most of them are using chemical and pyrolysis technique to recover monomers, and such
techniques are not environmental friendly due to its inherent polluting behaviour. So to avoid
all the environmental concerns, here melt blending technique is adopted to recycle the
recovered PMMA. Moreover, the reprocessability of this recovered PMMA is confirmed
using torque rheometer. The recovered PMMA was confirmed using RIC code, density
analysis and FTIR measurement. The properties of r-PMMA after mechanical recycling has
been analysed and compared with commercially available v-PMMA. The mechanical properties like tensile and flexural strength as well as tensile and flexural modulus are superior to that
of v-PMMA. However, r-PMMA shows lower impact resistance and elongation-at-break as
compared with the v-PMMA, due to the chain rupture arising during its previous life period.
Additionally, thermal stability of r-PMMA was found to be higher than v-PMMA. Thus, the rPMMA recovered can be used for larger manufacturing processes as well as in remanufactured
products. However, this r-PMMA as such will not be suitable for using in LGPs in new LCDs
because of its opaqueness developed during melt blending. The further work is extended to
improve the impact performance of this r-PMMA and thus exploring its industrial applications.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India for the financial support (DST/TSG/WM/2015/466-G) and E-Parisaraa, Bengaluru, India for kind
supply of WEEE materials. Thanks are extended to Dr. T. Arun, University of Chile, Santigo, Chile for
characterization for characterization of EDAX. The authors are thankful to the two anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments and suggestions for improving the quality of the manuscript.
