


Background
Although economic change begins in the supply-side (Schumpeter, 2008), consumers’
demand is a relevant driver for changes in products and processes. It is a cycle, where
in order to compete and grow, an innovative company must act in a technological,
technical, policy, and management environment that allows an innovative approach,
whereas market conditions must also be ensured.
The increase of consumers’ awareness towards environmental concerns, as well as other
social and governmental pressures claim the development of new products with less
environmental impact by manufacturers (Bocken et al. 2011). To achieve environmental
sustainability and do not neglect goals related to economic growth, innovation in green
products can be a key factor for companies (Dangelico and Pujari 2010).
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines
eco-innovation as “the development of products (goods and services), processes,
marketing methods, organizational structure, and new or improved institutional
arrangements, which, intentionally or not, contribute to a reduction of environmental
burdens in comparison with alternative practices “(Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD 2009).
Considering that consumers depend on companies to access the supply for their
needs and the growth of this new concept, the research question of this paper arises:
From the point of view of consumers and producers, what is the perspective of an
eco-innovation market for the food sector in Brazil? The main focus of this paper is to
analyse the production and consumption of eco-innovative food in Brazil.
The analysis of the production and supply-side aims to identify main motivations for
eco-innovation, trends and characteristics of this market using in-depth interviews. These
results, combined with the findings from the demand-side, will contribute to increase
comprehension about this expanding market in an emerging country. Considering that
sustainable consumption is a recent subject in Brazil, identifying the main characteristics
of this market will benefit companies of the food sector, both industry and retailing. It is
also important to emphasize that Brazil is one of the major food producer and exporter
worldwide although the mass scale production is main production pattern.
The analysis of the consumer-side aims at investigating conscious consumption behaviour of food in Brazil, specifically, to verify the relationship among personal values, attitudes towards the environment and technology, and attitudes and consumer behaviour
towards eco-innovative food. This second phase integrates an exploratory and descriptive
phase with consumers.
Attitudes represent a disposition to respond favourably or unfavourably to an object,
person, institution or event (Ajzen 1988). Values are related to social norms (or behaviour
rules), and reflect an internal reference to what has been considered good, beneficial,
important, desirable. It has been stated by the literature a great impact of cultural values
on consumers’ attitudes towards food consumption (Thøgersen and Beckmann 1997). In
addition, personal values affect (usually positively) people’s environmental behaviour, purchase intention and behaviour towards ecological food, e.g. organic food (Grunert 1993;
Grunert and Juhl 1995; Hopper and Mccarl 1991; Schwartz 1992).
The food sector is a good example for studying the integration between innovation
and sustainability for several reasons. Traditionally, the food sector has been oriented
towards commodities’ production, however, improvement of quality and efficiency in


the process are among the main features for increasing values for the sector. Finally,
increasing integration in the food chain emphasizes the relevance of studying “from
production to consumption”. Innovation is driven by a greater operational efficiency,
but also boosted by the final user’s demand, whose concern with food safety, health,
animal welfare, environmental issues has increased (Grunert et al. 2005).
Considering the Schumpeterian concept, an innovation needs to be commercially feasible, therefore, the understanding of the end consumer is an important component when
analysing industry. Consumers’ perception is an important driver to determine how
agents from the food chain can persevere in the market. Trends about how consumers
value food products are an important contribution to develop the strategy of food
companies (Grunert et al. 1993).
In Brazil, the food sector comprises 32,000 companies and employs 1.63 million
workers (Brazilian Food Industry Association ABIA 2014). Therefore, for the adoption of
a new way of production, and to aggregate environmental sustainability and innovation
(and eco-innovation), it is necessary to integrate the chain to ensure the provision of
adequate raw materials (production), food processing and supply (food and packaging
industry) to reach the consumers who are increasingly more aware in relation to the
health and convenience. Furthermore, the environmental impact and the level of
emissions from the food sector are considered high (Demirel and Kesidou 2011).
This article is structured as follows, after this introduction, in section 2 the theoretical
background is described, section 3 explains the method employed, followed by section 4,
where the main results are described and discussed. In section 5, the main conclusions
are drawn.

Eco-innovation, attitudes and values: from production to consumption

Eco-innovation is the technological and organizational innovation related to the implementation of the sustainable development (Faucheux et al. 2006). Applying and assimilating innovation and sustainability in business management are crucial to achieve
sustainability main objectives (social, economic and environmental) (Korhonen 2001).
Eco-innovation is also conceptualized as a redefinition of innovation, such as the types
of innovation defined by OECD (product, process and organizational) that are useful,
but not enough for studying issues of sustainable development embedded in innovation
(Rennings 2000).
Eco-innovations hold specific features, such as the importance of creating links and
positive trade-offs between the attribute of environmental protection and other critical
factors of competitive products and services, such as style, design, price and performance.
Furthermore, eco-innovations that succeed are highly dependent on greater participation
of stakeholders in their development. Accordingly, they tend to emerge from cooperation
between different entities, in addition to the constitution of partnerships among public
sector, academia and private sector (Carrillo-Hermosilla et al. 2010).
Companies are considered as the main source of social and environmental problems
in society. Therefore, more restrictive regulatory policies must be developed by governmental and non-governmental organizations to regulate business companies (Azzone
and Noci 1998; Schaltegger and Wagner 2011). Eco-innovation has become an important strategic tool for achieving sustainable development, not only for its potential to



reduce environmental impact, but also for improving competitiveness of firms and
countries that eco-innovate (Chang 2011; Kesidou and Demirel 2012).
Beyond the importance of including environmental concepts in corporate strategy, environmental awareness of consumers is also a relevant variable for production and consumption of environmental friendly products (Horbach 2008). Although eco-innovations can be
of lower acceptance (Halila and Rundquist 2011), the start for developing, producing and
marketing a new green product is also related to its potential to succeed in the market
(Dangelico and Pujari 2010). The perception of value of consumers about the insertion of
environmental issues in the development of products is a critical issue. Adoption and
diffusion of environmental innovative products depends on consumer’s evaluation
(Oltra and Jean 2009).
Within this context, values and consumer’s attitudes can influence on the purchase
of eco-innovative food. Consumer’s concern towards ethical, social and environmental
issues, but at the same time their demand for varied and affordable food, provides an
important and relevant opportunity for further research on the relationship between
specific attitudes towards eco-innovative food (AtEco) and its direct antecedent, i.e.,
attitudes towards the environment and nature (AtEnviro). Additionally, it is reasonable
to infer that attitudes towards technology (AtTechno), that reveals consumer perceptions about the prevailing type of food supply in Western societies, e.g., industrial food
production systems, should also influence (possibly negative) on consumer’s attitudes
towards eco-innovative food. Elsewhere, it is of great importance to incorporate the
study of consumer values (collective and individual) for analysing consumer’s attitudes,
once values are the main antecedents of attitudes, and allows the creation of the
hierarchical value-attitudes model.
Due to the profound impact of personal values on food consumption (Thøgersen and
Beckmann 1997), their possible influence on conscious purchase of eco-innovative food
is the starting point in the phase of the study with consumers. The model in Figure 1
first assumes direct causal relationships between: a) egalitarian values of consumers and
their attitudes towards environment and nature (“Collectivism - AttEnviro”); and b)
self-promoting values and attitudes towards technological progress (“Individualism AttTechno”).
Understanding how these attitudes influence conscious purchase of eco-innovative
products is particularly important from the strategic point of view for companies
when developing new products, as it reflects the contradictory impact of the influence
of consumers’ pro-technological and pro-environment attitudes in relation to consumption of these foods. Preliminary studies indicate the validity of this model (Krystallis
et al. 2012; Perrea et al. 2014), what motivates the research of the same model in the
Brazilian context.

Figure 1 The conceptual values-attitudes model.



Therefore, for surviving in the market, producers and sellers must produce products
with aggregated value for consumers, in a way that they perceive that it is worthwhile to
pay an extra premium price, which is higher than conventional products due to its higher
production costs (Grunert et al. 1993). The existence of a potential market willing to pay
for an innovation is the main condition to invest in an innovation (Dosi 1988).
Considering uncertainty as a particular characteristic of innovation, a multi-perspective
study, analysing consumers and companies, can be of great importance to the sector.
Understand how consumer values and attitudes affect consumption behaviour may
reduce uncertainty, and understand the potential acceptance of a product, can reduce
risks related to eco-innovators.
In addition, interaction between the main actors is expected due to the systemic nature
of innovation and can be a key factor for companies to adapt its activities to the given
environmental conditions (Asheim and Gertler 2005; Ettlie 1983; Fagerberg 2005).
Finally, Azzone and Noci (1998) highlight the role of the government to develop new
campaigns, aiming at improving environmental and social awareness. To justify financial
investments and to turn feasible to implement innovative environmental solutions, it is
important that market awareness arises. The method applied in this research is described
in the next section.

Method
The research can be divided in two parts, one focusing in the supply-side, to identify
eco-innovation motivations, and other in the demand-side, to investigate consumer
values, attitudes and behaviour towards eco-innovative food.
First phase: supply-side

To achieve the objectives of this study, in the first phase we conducted a qualitative
analysis using a documental survey and 13 in-depth interviews with firms and organizations involved with the eco-innovative food market, green certifications and green
food association.
A qualitative research approach is important to obtain deeper information from
relevant stakeholders in the food industry. The research protocol consisted of open
questions on the following variables: identifying main drivers for eco-innovation,
main trends and specific characteristics of this market from their point of view. The
interviewees were selected based on their relevance as key stakeholders with different
perspectives of the food industry in Brazil, see Table 1 for details. The 13 interviews
were recorded and transcribed. Data collection was conducted from March 2013 to
January 2014 and followed a prepared script based on the research objectives.
To analyse the data, the technique of content analysis were applied, in which the
content of interviews was divided into the following categories: Companies’ motivation to
work with eco-innovation, importance of technology in food production, influence of
Regulations, and Market, always related to eco-innovative food products.
Second phase: consumers

Considering that the level of environmental concern should be associated with a willingness to act in the same way (Roberts and Bacon 1997), and due to the target group



Table 1 Interviewee’s characteristics - supply-side
Interviewee Business segment

Details

Ind1

Food Industry: Producer

Organic food for young children

Ind2

Food Industry: Producer and
retailer

Agriculture, chicken, convenience products, producer of
antibiotic free poultry

Ind3

Food Industry: Producer

Alternative poultry production

Ind4

Food Industry: Producer

Agro ecological Industry - medicinal and food plants

Ind5

Food Industry: Producer

Organic bread

Ind6

Food Industry: Producer

Producer of biodynamic rice

Ind7

Food Industry: Producer

Organic juice and oils

Ret1

Food retailers

Supermarket specialized in organic, natural, and health products

Ret2

Food retailers

Sustainable food – grocery store and restaurant

Ret3

Food retailers

Organic tea

Ret4

Food retailers

Organic Food

Cert1

Certifier’s organizations

Organic certification organization

Cert2

Certifier’s organizations

Food traceability

for this study (conscious consumer), the data collection with consumers was carried out
in sustainable food retails outlets, e.g. organic street markets or sustainable food fairs.
The ecologically conscious consumer considers the impact on the environment when
purchasing goods and services (Roberts and Bacon 1997). Environmental consumption
occurs when consumers prefer products that do not damage the environment during the
production, distribution, consumption or final disposal (Portilho 2005). Additionally,
pro-environmental behaviour infers do not cause harms or even improve environment’s
condition (Steg and Vlek 2009) and entails that the consumer’s concern will involve a
more socially and environmentally responsible manner of acting (Balderjahn et al. 2013).

Exploratory phase

To analyse the demand-side, we first undertook an exploratory phase, with 42 face to
face interviews in three weekly organic street markets in Porto Alegre and São Paulo,
Brazil, and in a fair that is held annually in Porto Alegre, to promote organic, sustainable and solidarity-base food products.
The protocol included the following variables, which were the same used for the analysis: overall perception on sustainability; supply and relationship between technology x
sustainability; consumption: frequency of purchase and consumption; attributes; food
origin; motivation for purchase and consumption of sustainable food. The results of the
interviews undertaken for the exploratory phase were analysed and contribute to
understand the conscious consumption of eco-innovative food. A brief description of
the main results is presented below.

Overall perception on sustainability

Most respondents said that human beings are not in balance with nature. Actions taken
both individually and collectively, as well as actions taken by companies, can impact
severely on the environment. Although consumers were optimistic, as they perceived a
growing awareness regarding the relationship between sustainability and healthy eating,



the “holistic view” is still missing, since only single actions are taken, by a minority.
Consumers also depend a lot on companies for supplying green products, and complained
that most decisions taken by companies don’t consider neither the environment, nor
consumer wishes.
Supply and relationship between technology x sustainability

In relation to the supply of eco-innovative food, it was noticed high variability in
responses, whereas most of consumers who responded that the supply is sufficient
relates to consumers who purchase in Organic street markets. In other words, there is
a satisfactory supply for the product in natura, e.g. fresh fruits and vegetables, but other
eco-innovative products with higher added value for the producer and convenience for
consumers are still missing.
In relation to technology, generally, respondents considered technology essential for
increasing the production and supply of healthy, organic and eco-innovative food for
a larger number of consumers. Most respondents had a positive attitude towards
technology (only 6 consumers think that technology makes food production and
processing less sustainable).
Consumption

Among the sample from this exploratory phase, we can infer that when consumers
start to consume organic products, they acquire the habit, especially for those who
purchase in Organic Street Markets, and tend to become regular and loyal customers.
Consumers reported that they tend to establish a relationship with sellers from the
organic street markets, and that they trust in the information provided by sellers, who
became the main source of knowledge about organic food and production. In average,
Brazilian consumers seek for healthier food when purchasing organic food, their main
motivation is to avoid ingestion of poisons, pesticides, and to prevent diseases.
Descriptive phase

Further, a descriptive phase was performed, and it was conducted a Survey with 401 consumers, to analyse attitudes, intention and buying behaviour of conscious consumers in
traditional Organic Street Markets in Porto Alegre, Brazil. The quantitative study with
consumers aimed at identifying values, attitudes and conscious consumers’ purchase in
relation to embody innovation and technology in the production of eco-innovative food.
Results from this phase are compared with data from the industry to follow the “from
production to consumption” approach of this study. We choose the organic street
markets by convenience, to ensure that the sample is composed of conscious consumer of
eco-innovative food, e.g. organic food. Eco-innovative food was defined in the questionnaire as follow: “Eco-innovative food are those endowed with ethical/social/ environmental
appeals, such as organic food, meat or eggs from free range animals, fair trade, family
agriculture, among others”.
The questionnaire applied in this phase included the following sections: 1) first, an
initial filter question, to ensure that the respondent was a conscious consumers; 2)
second section to investigate personal values, 21- item version (portrait value questionnaire – PVQ) from Schwartz (1992) measured on a 6-point similarity scale with



end-points 1 = “not like me at all” to 6 = “very much like me”; 3) third section refers to
attitudes towards technology (5 items used by Hamstra, 1991), environment and nature
(using a reduced 5-item version of the New Environmental Paradigm (NEP) scale by Dunlap et al. 2000), and technological progress (5 items by Beckmann et al. (2001), measured
on 7-point Likert-type agreement scales, with end-points 1 = “strongly disagree” to
7 = “strongly agree”; 4) in the fourth section, attitudes towards food production, measured
on a 7-point Likert type, in a 5 items scale based on Lindeman and Väänänen (2000); 5)
Attitudes and conscious purchase behaviour towards eco-innovative food. For attitudes, a semantic scale were used, and questions to identify consumption of this
products; 6) Demographics.
Professional researchers hired to carry out the data collection process, which was
performed in-person in September 2013 in four Organic Street Markets in the city
of Porto Alegre.
Attitudes are determined by a combination of personal values (egalitarian or selfish)
and general views on environment and nature (affective attitude) and technological
progress (cognitive attitude). The quantitative data from this stage was analysed with
SPSS (Statistical univariate). The final sample included 401 respondents. The sample’s
profile is shown in the next section.

Demographics

The demographic data are shown in Table 2.

Table 2 Demographics
Variable

Level

Frequency

Percent

Gender

Female

259

64,6%

Male

142

35,4%

Valid

401

100,0%

Less than €414

36

9%

€415 - €622

47

12%

€623 – €1,036

95

25%

€1,037- €2,073

Income (per month)

104

27%

€2,074 - €4,146

72

19%

> €4,146

33

9%

Valid
Education

387

100%

Primary (Basic education) or less

17

4,3%

Secondary (High school)

140

35,4%

Superior (University degree) or more

239

60,3%

Valid
Marital status

396

100%

Married

163

41%

Not married, but living together

87

22%

Not married, living alone

99

25%

Divorced

25

6%

Widowed

24

6%

Valid

398

100%



Regarding the age of the respondents, the average age is 43.6 and median is 42. The
majority of the sample population was female (64.6%). In Porto Alegre, there are
1,409,351 inhabitants: 54% women and 46% men (Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics – IBGE 2013). The level of education of the consumers is high, with 60.3% with
a University degree or higher. Most of the sample lives together with other people, and
have a median income per month. In the next section, the main results are described.

Results
In this section, the main results from the supply-side are presented, followed by the
descriptive analysis of consumers’ research.

Supply-side

The main findings from in-depth interviews with relevant representatives from the
supply-side are presented in this section. The analysis was categorised as follows: first, the
main motivations stated by the companies to adopt eco-innovation in the food sector;
then the importance of technology for food production, importance and impact of regulations, and finally, trend and perspectives for this Market, especially in a emerging country.

Companies’ motivation to work with eco-innovation

Representatives from companies stated that they were moved by their own mission and
philosophy for work with a product that provides health and welfare for consumers,
and deny the use of pesticides in the process, especially for organic producers. Another
great driver is to establish food chains that work with those principles of innovation
and sustainability. The food sector also face a commercial motivation to this market,
whose good’s supply is lower than its demand (Ind7).
The motivation was also related to health issues, since healthier food has a direct
relationship to public health scores of obesity, hypertension, among others. Healthier
and more sustainable food must be produced in a more controlled environment, using
the right amount of sugar, salt, and, overall, with no pesticides (Cert2).
They were also motivated to develop new products that were not available in the
eco-innovative market yet. The importance of the food chain was also highlighted in
this case, given that in some cases is necessary to develop suppliers, food industry and
retailers also have this responsibility (Ind2).

Importance of technology in food production

Technology was reported as an essential input for the supply side, and as an important
driver to increase the supply of sustainable food, to reduce losses, and, to improve
environmental sustainability. It can also be used to improve packages, which must be
ecological, but also practical, modern, and attractive.
It is an important driver to increase the adoption of more sustainable processes in
food industry, given that technology and quality in the process has a direct relationship
in the food industry (Ind6). Innovation in the food sector is also driven by an unique
capability of the company and motivated by a willing to differentiate and to add value
for the product.



Usually innovation is more common in bigger and more mature firms, and even
when the ecological and sustainable impact is not intentional, they contribute for
eco-innovators food chain. Producers are very focused in ecological issues, but not
in innovation and commercial skills to improve the market (Ret4).
Influence of regulations

Regulations and legislations were seen as incomplete and ineffective, since Brazilian
legislation for ‘organics’, for example, mainly focus in fruits and vegetables, wherein other
products remain uncovered by an organic or other type of eco-innovative background.
Furthermore, this is a complaint from the supply-side, because it is difficult to communicate to the market about other health and eco-innovative products. Besides this, it was
highlighted that there are much more advertising on junk food than on sustainable food
in the market.
Market

The market has a great potential to grow and become more competitive. The interviews
pointed out that some barriers still need to be transposed: logistics, high quality
manpower and more convenient products for consumers.
Consumers

Results from the survey with consumers are presented in this section. First, univariate
statistics were applied, in order to measure attitude and value items. Next, we investigated the values and attitudes structure by an exploratory factor analyses (EFA). The
principal component analysis with Varimax rotation was applied. KMO (Keiser-MeyerOlkin) score and Bartlett’s test were verified (Hair et al. 1998).
In order to verify if there is any relation between some groups of variables identified
in the study, a regression analysis was performed. The general purpose of multiple
regressions is to learn more about the relationship between several independent or predictor variables and a dependent or criterion variable. Therefore, the same pool of attitudes and values identified by the EFA was used as independent variables (predictors),
and consumption of eco-innovative food per week was used as the dependent variable.
Educational level, gender, age and marital status were used as control variables.
To assess the internal consistency of the data collection instrument, Cronbach’s alpha
coefficients were measured for each of the constructs (see Tables 3 and 4), and satisfactory internal consistency was found, almost all greater than 0.6 (Hair et al. 1998). Cronbach’s alpha score for the personal value “Universalism/benevolence”, a factor extracted
from exploratory factor analysis, was 0.56, and need further investigation. Cronbach’s
alpha scores for the three attitudinal scales were satisfactory to very high (0.78 for the
attitudes towards environment and nature, 0.82 for the attitudes towards technological progress; 0.82 for Attitudes towards food production; 0.84 for attitudes
towards eco-innovative food; and 0.94 for Attitude towards Industrial production).
Values and attitudes

Values and attitudes were then analysed, by means of an exploratory factor analysis to
test their structure (Table 3). All attitudes variables presented very consistent factor



Table 3 Exploratory factor analysis of the attitude scales
ATTITUDES

Loading Mean

Attitude towards environment and nature

Cronbach alpha: 0.78

S.D.

6.42

Humans are severely abusing the environment

0.798

6.68

0.726

The balance of nature is fragile to withstand the impacts of modern industrial
nations*

0.747

6.57

0.867

The so-called “ecological crisis” facing humankind does not get proper attention*

0.794

6.38

1.054

The Earth is finite. with little space and limited resources

0.576

6.23

1.260

If things continue on their present course. we will soon experience a major
ecological catastrophe

0.812

6.25

1.231

Attitude towards technological progress

Cronbach alpha: 0.82

6.07

Many food manufacturers are more interested in making money than in the
nutritional quality of its products

0.726

6.29

0.974

Modern production of food removes vitamins and minerals from food

0.812

6.16

1.004

The food industry is little concerned about the nutritional value of their products

0.850

6.09

1.035

Most foods are so processed that they lose nutritional value

0.819

6.17

0.997

The vast majority of food presents risks when consumed

0.649

5.65

1.336

Attitude towards Industrial production

Cronbach alpha: 0.941

5.08

The degree of civilization can be measured from the degree of technological
development

0.901

5.17

1.747

New technological inventions and applications make up the driving force of
progress of society

0.905

5.19

1.669

In Brazil we are probably better off than ever thanks to the tremendous progress in
technology

0.886

4.72

1.845

Throughout the ages. technological know-how has been the most important
weapon in the struggle for life

0.925

5.12

1.700

Because of the development of the technology we will be able to face up to the
problems of tomorrow’s society

0.886

5.18

1.799

Attitudes towards food production

Cronbach alpha: 0.817

6.79694

It is important that the food I eat on a typical day…
Has been prepared in an environmentally friendly way

0.750

6.76

0.591

Has been produced in a way which has not shaken the balance of nature

0.738

6.78

0.527

Is packaged in an environmentally friendly way

0.801

6.72

0.599

Bring benefits to the local community

0.680

6.75

0.521

Has been produced in a way that is guaranteed that animals have not
undergone pain

0.667

6.74

0.669

Has been produced by companies that guarantee fair working conditions to
their employees

0.616

6.90

0.339

Has been produced without the use of child labor and/or slave labor

0.649

6.93

0.297

Attitudes towards eco-innovative - food

Cronbach alpha: 0.84

6.94763

Negative/Positive

0.913

6.94

0.366

Harmful/Beneficial

0.885

6.97

0.258

Unsatisfied/Satisfied

0.739

6.93

0.458

Unpleasant/Pleasant

0.895

6.96

0.271

*Originally, reversed scales, but unreversed for Brazilian questionnaire.

loading scores, so it was only necessary to remove one of the items in the scale
“Attitudes towards eco-innovative food” for further analysis.
The scale “Attitude towards environment and nature”, presented internal consistency,
and the resultant factor analysis kept all the 5 items, with satisfactory factor loadings



Table 4 Exploratory factor analysis of the personal values
Item description
Traditional and Moral

Loading
Cronbach alpha: 0.68

Mean

S.D.

4.88

Security

0.587

5.26

0.799

Conformity

0.828

4.51

1.192

4.88

1.115

Tradition
Adventure

0.810
Cronbach alpha: 0.715

Stimulation

4.18
0.742

4.30

1.20

Hedonism

0.700

5.40

0.76

Achievement

0.787

3.53

1.32

3.49

0.96

Power
Universalism/benevolence
Benevolence

0.685
Cronbach alpha: 0.559

5.57
0.684

5.749

0.379

Universalism

0.764

5.453

0.502

Self-direction

0.694

5.516

0.580

(KMO 0.82, Barlett Test 597.553, sig. 0.000, 56.31% of explained variance). The high
mean of this construct (6.42), allow us to infer that consumers in the analysed sample
are very aware of the environment.
Unexpectedly, “Attitude towards technological progress” (KMO 0.843, Barlett Test
716.83, sig. 0.000, 60.02% of explained variance), also presented high means among
conscious consumer, what confirm the results from the exploratory phase. Brazilian
consumers believe that technology can be a positive determinant of the production of
healthier and more environmental friendly food.
Attitude towards industrial production (KMO 0.853, Barlett Test 1262.56, sig. 0.000,
82.29% of explained variance) presented the highest reliability among attitude scales in
the Brazilian, and the lowest mean (5.08), but still positive. This result ratifies that for
Brazilian consumers, sustainability and industrial food production can coexist, somehow a
different result from what is usually found in Europe. For the majority of Europeans,
industrial food production is related to technology (reflecting consumer perceptions about
the industrial food production systems that prevail as source of food supplies to Western
societies) (De Barcellos et al. 2012; Krystallis et al. 2012; Perrea et al. 2014).
All the 7-item of Attitudes towards food production were kept (KMO 0.798, Barlett
Test 964.606, sig. 0.000, 49.37% of explained variance). In the scale Attitudes towards
eco-innovative food (KMO 0.775, Barlett Test 1005.33, sig. 0.000, 74.12% of explained
variance), the variable represented by the first statement of the semantic scale (bad/
good) had to be removed due to its very low reliability score. The mean value of 6.95
indicates a high positive attitude towards eco-innovative food among consumers from
the sample.
Generally for attitudes, the loadings were quite satisfactory, indicating that the items
were highly correlated with the factor. Next, Table 4 presents the results of the exploratory
factor analysis of the personal values, using PVQ original dimensions (KMO 0.685, Barlett
Test 858.96, sig. 0.000, 60.457% of explained variance.
Similarly to the findings of de Barcellos et al. (2012), the exploratory factor analysis
of the personal values items shows that not all the variables behave or aggregate as the



original scale. When analysing and interpreting the 10 value dimensions of the PVQ,
only three items that belong to collectivistic values have been aggregated into one
factor, and those are “Conformity”, “Security” and “Tradition”. Based on the resulting
characteristics of the items in this group, and considering the similar result found by
de Barcellos et al. (2012), this new factor was named “Traditional and Moral Values”
representing more a traditional behaviour.
Likewise, four items that belong to individualistic values, “Stimulation”, “Achievement”, “Hedonism” and “Power” were also aggregated into a new factor, named
“Adventure”, representing a more adventurous way of life. Finally, the original items
from the dimensions “Universalism” and “Benevolence” and “Self-Direction” from the
PVQ were aggregated in a new factor, “Universalism/Benevolence”. Mean value for this
factor was the highest (5.57), followed by “Traditional and Moral” values (4.88) and
“Adventure” values (4.18), indicating that for the Brazilian respondents collective
values seem to overtake individual ones.
Afterward, we present the multiple regression analysis that was applied to investigate relationships between attitudes, personal values and consumption of ecoinnovative food.
Regression analysis between attitudes and values and consumption of eco-innovative food

To identify the influence of independent variables in the consumption of eco-innovative
food (dependent variable: consumption per week), a regression analysis was applied
(Table 5). The main associated factor to eco-innovative food consumption is attitudes
towards eco-innovative food. So for every unit increase in attitudes towards eco-innovative
food, a 0.902 unit increase in eco-innovative food consumption is predicted, holding all
other variables constant. In addition, attitudes towards food production, intention to buy
eco-innovative food, frequency of purchase, Education and Adventure values also influence
the consumption of eco-innovative food, the later with a negative impact.
A 0.799 unit increase in attitudes towards food production will be expected for each
unit increase of eco-innovative food consumption. Every unit increase in intention to
buy eco-innovative food and frequency of purchase is expected a 0.672 and 0.439,
respectively, point increase in the eco-innovative food consumption per week.
“Adventure values” has a negative impact into eco-innovative consumption and for each
increase in the adventure values, consumption will decrease by 0.354. Among the investigated socio-demographic variables, only Education is significant in this model, meaning
that from one educational category to the next higher one (and keeping all other variables
constant) will increase consumption of eco-innovative food products in 0.364.

Discussion
Following the main goal of this study that was to draw the perspectives of the ecoinnovative market in the food sector in Brazil we can see some peculiarities in this market, both from the supply and the consumers’ side. Although companies seek economic
profitability, and use innovation in green products to achieve environmental sustainability (Dangelico and Pujari 2010; Korhonen 2001), their motivation to invest in the
eco-innovative market is more related to personal motivations of its founders. These
personal inspirations are disclosed in their own mission and philosophy to provide



Table 5 Regression analysis
Model

Unstandardized
coefficients

Standardized coefficients t

Sig.

B

Std. Error

Beta

Constant

−13.197

3.587

−3.679

.000

Traditional_Moral

-.108

.123

-.047

-.881

.379

Adventure

-.354

.135

-.147

−2.610 .009

Universalism_Benevolence

.148

.257

.029

.575

.566

Intention to buy eco-innovative food

.672

.199

.162

3.376

.001

Purchase_freq

.439

.080

.266

5.498

.000

Attitudes towards eco-innovative food .902

.382

.113

2.359

.019

Attitudes towards food production

.799

.249

.158

3.211

.001

Attitude towards environment and nature .109

.128

.045

.848

.397

Attitude towards technological progress

.127

.116

.056

1.090

.276

Attitude towards industrial production

.011

.062

.010

.183

.855

Education

.364

.164

.112

2.219

.027

Gender

-.088

.187

-.023

-.469

.640

Age

.005

.007

.044

.765

.445

Marital_Stat

.080

.073

.053

1.095

.274

Control variables

a. Dependent Variable: Cons_week

sustainable and health food for consumers. This result is consistent with a recent study
that reveals an ideological motivation for companies working with organic and sustainable
food (Dalcin et al. 2014).
Although consumers’ perception that companies in general do not consider the environment or consumers’ needs, companies struggle to build a more sustainable supply
chain, to develop their suppliers, producers and other important stakeholders for providing products in this market, that is seen as promising in the near future. Some bottlenecks, as the production of convenience sustainable products and logistics still need
to be reversed. Decisions on location and material flow affect the environment and are
crucial for the supply side (Beamon 2005), and this is a concern in the Brazilian scenario,
not only for the food sector. Even in cases where all the processes and relationships are
developed in a pro-environmental and social manner, there is no sustainable option and
companies must use the existing modes of transportation (Bossle and Nascimento 2014).
Another interesting result is associated to the relationship among innovation, technology,
and sustainability. At the same time that results brought what was found in previous work
(Faucheux et al. 2006; Chang 2011; Kesidou and Demirel 2012), that eco-innovation can be
an important tool for achievement of sustainable development, technology has come up as
an important input to be more developed and employed in this market. Technology can
increase innovation rates and improve sustainability, reducing losses and adding value to
products (economic pillar), increasing supplying and production of healthier and sustainable food (social and environmental pillar).
In the consumers’ side we also noticed a very positive attitude toward the relevance
of technology as a determinant to improve the provision of healthier and more



environmental friendly food. This can be a trend in Brazilian society that seems to be
open for innovativeness and at the same time concerned with environmental sustainability
(De Barcellos et al. 2012).
Even if consumers did not appear as an explicit motivation for the adoption of
eco-innovation by companies, an innovation must be commercialized (Schumpeter
2008) and the importance of consumer awareness (Horbach 2008) is not neglected.
Communication about health and sustainable aspects related to their products
depend on clear legislation and labels, and difficulties in this area was a significant
issue brought from the supply-side.This finding is aligned to previous research on
functional food regulation in Brazil (Oliveira et al., 2014). In accordance with Azzone
and Noci (1998), government must play a key role in turning regulations more
complete and effective, and develop institutional campaigns to raise awareness in the
market for this kind of product.
In relation to consumer awareness, we can assert that the studied sample is very conscious, presenting high scores for attitudes towards environment. This result ratify the
good perspectives for this market in Brazil, since for Oltra and Jean (2009), consumers’
assessment is critical for the adoption and success of eco-innovation.
The literature state a positive effect of personal values in consumers’ pro-environmental
behaviour towards the consumption of sustainable food (Grunert 1993; Grunert and Juhl,
1995; Hopper and Mccarl 1991; Schwartz 1992; Thøgersen and Beckmann 1997). Nevertheless, even if Brazilian consumers’ collective values presented higher means than individualistic ones in this sample, apparently this has not actual influence in their behaviour
in the market. The main factors that influenced consumption of eco-innovative food in this
sample was the attitude towards eco-innovative food, attitudes towards food production,
intention to buy eco-innovative food, frequency of purchase, Education and Adventure
values, the later with a negative impact.
This later result apparently contradictory with literature on personal values is in consonance with De Barcellos et al. (2012) that found that consumers with Adventure values
tend to prefer processed food instead of fresh products, maybe due to their willingness to
have more time to their leisure. In this research, results from both exploratory and
descriptive phase, demonstrated that consumers’ current view about eco-innovative
food available in the market, usually fruits and vegetables, tend to demand more time
to prepare. In that sense, urge in the market the necessity of both fresh and more
elaborated sustainable food, but in convenient packages, easy to handle and to
prepare.

Conclusion
This paper can be divided into three research moments, in-depth interviews with
producers, retailers and other representatives from the food chain, 42 exploratory interviews with consumers, and a Survey with 401 conscious consumers.
The study indicates that enterprise’s mission and strategy are important drivers for the
adoption of eco-innovations in food. Producers, retailers and other supply-side agents are
very confident about their role in supplying eco-innovative food, such as organics.
Another important role is related to the need to develop suppliers and to be mindful on
what consumers are willing to buy/consume. Technology is an essential input for the


supply side, and can act as an important driver to increase the supply of sustainable food,
reduce losses, and, improve environmental sustainability.
Our study highlights the relevance of eco-innovation for the food industry especially
in regard to the use of technology and innovation as a way to increase the healthiness
and environmental characteristics in food products, and overall for the implementation
of sustainable development. The importance of including environmental concepts in
corporate strategy and the desirable potential to succeed in the market, which depends
on consumer’s evaluation, emphasize the importance of this study from production and
consumption of environmental friendly products (Dangelico and Pujari 2010; Horbach
2008; Oltra and Jean 2009).
The survey indicates that consumers presented strong egalitarian values, such as
benevolence and universalism, and very positive attitudes towards environment and
technological progress, as well as a positive attitude and intention to buy ecoinnovative food. Additional findings points out towards a certain belief on behalf of
Brazilian consumers that technology can be a determinant of relevant aspects of ecoinnovative foods.
The consumption of eco-innovative food is influenced by attitudes towards ecoinnovative food, as well as attitudes towards food production, intention to buy ecoinnovative food, frequency of purchase, Education and Adventure values. Although the
impact of personal values on food consumption has been validated in other studies
(Thøgersen and Beckmann 1997), in this Brazilian sample this influence, has not been
proven, only adventure values significantly influence (negatively) eco-innovative food’s
consumption.
This research is of particular academic value, by adding empirical evidence about
the relationships that rule how values and general attitudes influence attitudes towards eco-innovative food in the Brazilian food consumption context. Practical implications of this research is related to the need for companies to remain competitive
and profitable, and innovation and environmental sustainability can be used as alternatives to mitigate environmental risks derived from the company’s activities. Brazil
is also a global food producer and changes in production and consumption patterns
should be investigated as it might influence the mass scale production current
paradigm.
Although the sample is not representative of the whole country, and results cannot
be generalised it would be interested to apply the same approach in other industries,
deeply analysing what drives companies to adopt eco-innovation and compare with the
food sector. Another interesting research would be to investigate consumer’s attitudes
and intention to buy for other eco-innovative products, and test the influence from
varied perspectives.


