
1 Introduction
Mail-ordering has been growing rapidly over the last decade [1]. For the most part, this development can be
attributed to the increasing acceptance of online shopping.
Obviously, e-tailers have done a good job in reducing the
risks customers commonly associate with mail-order
businesses. One common way of building trust and

increasing the likelihood of ordering is the establishment of
liberal return policies. Well-known examples of this strategy are the fashion retailers Zalando (www.zalando.com)
and Zappos (www.zappos.com), which allow customers to
return merchandise for up to 365 days at no charge.
However, returns also entail a variety of direct and indirect
costs.
Direct costs include administrative and processing
costs [2]. Additional expenses occur if the merchandise is
received in a deteriorated condition. In these cases,
retailers must bear the costs of new packaging, reconditioning, value depreciation, and waste disposal. In the
following, these costs are referred to as disposition costs.
Returns caused by poor customer experiences, such as
poor fulﬁllment or product quality, may indirectly harm
satisfaction as well as loyalty, weaken the retailer’s reputation, and decrease the customer’s lifetime value [2–4].
Indirect costs represent potential damages to customer
relations and are therefore difﬁcult to quantify. These
costs are closely related to but should not be confused
with the consumer’s return effort, which is occasionally
referred to as ‘‘hassle costs’’ [e.g., 5, 6]. Consumers
choose the return option if they perceive the purchase
price minus the transaction costs to be larger than the
remaining product value after the return period [6, 7].
Transaction costs can involve hassles such as compromising one’s free time and psychological well-being.
They can also take the form of restocking fees or
excluding shipping costs from reimbursement [5, 8].
Greater hassle increases the perceived transaction costs,
which, on the one hand, may damage customer satisfaction but, on the other hand, leads to more customers
retaining their purchases instead of sending them back [3].
Consequently, the customer’s hassle costs reduce the
retailer’s direct costs but raise the indirect return costs.

on the range of available legal options. In the USA, no federal
law governs the issue of product returns. Except for a few state
laws that require retailers to conspicuously disclose the policy
employed before the transaction is completed [e.g., 9, 10],
sellers can freely establish their own policy. That is, distance
sellers may refuse returns, charge restocking fees, or not
reimburse shipping rates. In contrast, the European Union
grants consumers comprehensive revocation rights. With a
few exceptions, consumers may withdraw from their purchase
for any reason within 14 days of the purchase. The seller must
fully refund the buyer, including any shipping charges paid.
The buyer must bear the costs of returning the goods only if the
seller disclosed this policy ahead of the transaction. Otherwise, the products are collected and transported at the trader’s
expense [11]. Hence, the possibility of shifting direct costs
from the retailer to the consumer is much more limited in the
European Union than in the USA.
Irrespective of the legal environment, both direct and
indirect costs emphasize the need for effective returns
management. Rogers et al. [12] deﬁne returns management
as the ‘‘[…] process by which activities associated with
returns, reverse logistics, gatekeeping, and avoidance are
managed within the ﬁrm and across key members of the
supply chain.’’ Consequently, returns management is
composed of the efﬁcient handling and processing of
returns as well as preventive measures to reduce the
number of incoming returns [13].
Avoidance involves all proactive measures to eliminate
the reasons why goods are returned [12]. This includes
enhancing product quality, streamlining of the product
range, reducing delivery time, providing comprehensive
product information, and offering ﬁnancial incentives that
lead to more informed ordering decisions. In contrast,
gatekeeping disrupts or prevents orders from entering the
returns channel [12]. Thus, mail-order businesses provide
refunds that do not require the item to be returned, increase
a consumer’s transaction costs, or suspend deliveries.
Since many retailers consider their return rates and costs
excessively high, they are interested in ideas and technologies to reduce return rates. Certain publications even
consider preventive returns management the most critical
issue [2, 14, 15]. The success of several technology startups demonstrates the need for innovative concepts and
tools. Examples are Upcload (www.upcload.com) and
Sproov (www.sproov.com), both of which offer online
clothing ﬁtting advisors. Their services may reduce sizerelated product returns by 12–60 % [16]. Shoeﬁtr (www.
shoeﬁtr.com), which was recently purchased by Amazon
[17], offers similar business intelligence for shoes. This
application requires the customer’s current model and size
to calculate the likelihood that the new shoe will ﬁt as well;
it then recommends the best-ﬁtting size.

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:3

However, preventive returns management is not free.
Decision-makers have to wonder whether it is worth it.
Will the implementation of an online ﬁtting tool, the production of high-deﬁnition product videos, or faster delivery
be worthwhile? To answer these questions, it is crucial to
understand the relation between the returns rate and the
associated expenditures. Little research has been dedicated
to this topic despite its pivotal role for the competitiveness
of mail-order businesses. Therefore, this article attempts to
contribute to the following research questions:
•
•

•

What type of relation exists between the returns rate
and the associated costs?
What happens once the effects of deterioration because
of damages incurred before the return deadline and/or
during transportation are taken into account?
What strategic implications does this relation have on
how to best arrange the returns management?

The article is structured as follows. The upcoming section
summarizes the relevant literature on this topic and provides a deeper understanding of the decision-making context. Next, the typical mail-ordering sales process is
modeled in a circular fashion that lends itself to the
examination of the returned goods’ cost impact. To
increase its practical relevance, the basic model is then
extended with the possibility of deterioration during the
revocation period. In the following, the model results are
discussed and strategic recommendations on how to best
arrange the returns management process are provided.
Finally, a conclusion and an outlook on future research are
given.

2 The literature review and background
Over the last decade, the literature on returns management
has increased [13]. To structure the existing work, conceptual, empirical, and analytical contributions are distinguished, because very few papers deal with product returns
in mail-ordering-related domains such as business-tobusiness returns or reverse logistics in other industries will
also be considered.
2.1 Conceptual understanding and empirical
evidence
Conceptually, Rogers et al. [12] describe a generic returns
management process that enables businesses to efﬁciently
handle returned products and to identify levers that reduce
the quantity of incoming returns. The strategic subprocess
suggests determining returns management goals and strategy, developing avoidance, gatekeeping and disposition
and developing a framework of metrics for performance
measurement. On the operational end, return requests are
received, routing is determined, returns are received, disposition is selected, consumers are credited, returns are
analyzed, and performance is measured.
Another process is presented by Stock et al. [18]. This
more operational approach is composed of ﬁve stages: (1)
receive; (2) sort and stage; (3) process; (4) analyze; and (5)
support. The process begins with returns arriving at the
processing site, which is usually a centralized warehouse or
distribution center. Next, the sort and stage activity prepares the efﬁcient processing of incoming items. Thus, it is
reasonable to identify and separate different product categories (e.g., fashion and consumer electronics) as they are
likely to involve different processing. At the third stage,
returns are transported to a processing station where
qualiﬁed personnel open each item and separate the
accompanying paperwork, which is often sent to customer
service. Customers may be refunded at this stage if prepayments have been made. The fourth step involves
examining each return thoroughly and determining the
appropriate disposition option. Finally, the redistribution of
repackaged, repaired, and refurbished products must be
supported. As the authors observe, all of these activities
incur signiﬁcant direct costs [18].
Norek [19] adds that disposition costs depend heavily on
the chosen recovery option because of different cost
structures and required depreciation. According to that
study, at least ﬁve asset recovery options exist. These are
listed in descending order of revenue return as follows: (1)
sell as new; (2) repair or repackage and resell as new; (3)
repair or repackage and resell as used; (4) resell at a lower
value to a salvage house; and (5) sell by the pound to a
salvage house. Blackburn et al. [20] note that products with
short sales cycles are threatened with additional costs
through slow processing. The researchers refer to this as
the ‘‘marginal value of time.’’ In these cases, it may be
economical to choose faster transportation and decentralized processing to minimize the time a product remains in
the reverse pipeline to compensate for the value loss over
time.
Empirically, some authors measure the costs of returned
goods. Stock et al. [18] estimate return expenditures at
$30–35 per item for American mail-ordering. In Europe,
shorter distances lead to lower transportation charges,
which explain a slightly smaller ﬁnancial impact. A study
by IBI Research estimates the costs for processing,
administrative work, and disposition at 20 € per return in
the German mail-order market [21]. Asdecker/Weigel [22]
provide a more detailed appraisal. A survey of 303 German
mail-order businesses showed average processing and
administrative costs of 7.93 € per return. The unit costs

Page 3 of 12 3

decline with company size; smaller companies deal with
much higher expenses than their larger counterparts. The
surveyed mail-order businesses claim that the average costs
caused by the deterioration are 13.1 % of the goods’ value
[22].
2.2 Analytical modeling
Analytical decision-making models that include merchandise returns and their associated costs represent the
vast majority of relevant publications. Two categories
can be distinguished: inventory planning and product
recovery models. Fleischmann et al. [23] present an
(s,Q)-inventory model with returns. The researchers’
conclusion is ‘‘[…] that the return-ﬂow has rather little
impact on the optimized expected average costs unless
the return ratio is close to one, resulting in high on-hand
inventory’’ [23]. Vlachos/Dekker [24] solve single-period newsvendor problems considering resalable product
returns that arrive before the end of the selling season.
They assume that products can only be resold once per
selling period. However, in practice, products may be
returned and reused several times within a season.
Mostard/Teunter [25] eliminate this assumption by using
a net demand approach. In addition, Mostard et al. [26]
show that incomplete information regarding the demand
distribution does not thwart a successful application.
Chen/Bell [27] simultaneously examine proﬁt-maximizing pricing and order quantity planning. Their article
is based on a study by Anderson et al. [8] that claims that
the probability of a return increases with a rise in the sale
price. They solve this problem for single- and multiperiodic cases by assuming in the latter case that returns
in period t will be sold in the following period t þ 1 [27].
Despite integrating returns, all of these models rather
optimize decision-making in the forward supply chain
than in the backward supply chain. Product returns are
viewed as a parameter that depends on the quantity sold
in previous periods, not as a decision variable. Therefore, the existing models may not help to evaluate preventive returns management measures as examined in
this paper.
The second category of mathematical models pursues
the optimal product recovery strategy by improving
acquisition, remanufacturing, and salvaging decisions [e.g.,
28–30]. These contributions consider the quantity of product returns as a decision variable. Hence, these contributions are extremely useful to obtain the most from returns.
However, particularly in mail-ordering, a major proportion
of returns may be prevented or avoided before they actually
occur, which would be the best option for many distance
sellers. As Johnson [14] summarizes, ‘‘[t]he best return is
no return.’’


Item is
returned
yes
Item is offered
for sale

Order

Delivery

Revocation?
no
Item is
sold

Fig. 1 Linear rendering of the sales process for an item
Table 1 Calculation of costs
and contribution margin while
considering returns for n = 20
orders in accordance with
Speights/Hilinski [31]

Rate of returns b

0%

20 %

50 %

100 %

Expenditures subject to b: b Á ðp À c þ rÞ ($)

0

12.50

31.25

62.50

Total costs: d þ b Á ðp À c þ rÞ ($)

27.50

40.00

58.75

90.00

Contribution margin: CMorder ðbÞ ($)

12.50

0

-18.75

-50.00

Sum of contribution margins: n Á CMorder ðbÞ ($)

250

0

-375

-1000

A cost-beneﬁt analysis of preventive returns management measures requires an understanding of the relation
between the rate of returns and the associated costs. This
type of examination has only been attempted in two articles
[31, 32] that share one commonality: They view the order
and the return as an isolated, onetime process that ends
with the decision to either retain or return the goods
(Fig. 1).
Accordingly, the vendor must bear the cost of returned
goods r (restocking cost) in addition to the distribution
costs d, which consist of the customer acquisition costs as
well as the packaging and shipping costs if paid by the
retailer. If the customer wants to keep the goods, the
company will realize the sales price p minus the purchase
price c and the necessary distribution costs d. Consequently, the contribution margin CM of an order in relation
to the rate of returns b is calculated as follows:
CMorder ðbÞ ¼ ð1 À bÞ Á ðp À c À dÞ À b Á ðr þ dÞ
¼ p À c À d À b Á ðp À c þ r Þ:

ð1Þ

An application of this formula is shown by Speights/
Hilinski [31] in a typical example. The authors assign the
parameter values p ¼ $100, c ¼ $60, d ¼ $27:50, r ¼
$22:50 and assume four scenarios, each encompassing 20
orders (refer to Table 1). Accordingly, a business with a
rate of returns of 0 % generates a contribution margin of
$250, which becomes negative as soon as b crosses the
20 % threshold. If none of the customers retain their
ordered items (b ¼ 100 %), the company loses $1000.
Mondragon et al. [32] focus entirely on the variable
expenses instead of the contribution margins. In the
framework of a mobile communications company case
study, they report the following expected cost savings,
which resulted from a reduction in the rate of returns [32]:
‘‘For the […] device the cost associated to returned and
processed units is in the order of £ 20,700 (a return rate of

123

15.41 %). If returned rates are reduced to 5 %, then the
costs associated to returned and processed units is in the
order £ 6835.90.’’
The statements in both Speights/Hilinski [31] and Mondragon et al. [32] suggest a linear relation between the rate of
returns and the associated costs. However, this assumption is
premature for two reasons. First, the authors’ deliberations
are based on singular, limited planning periods, which limit
the cost impact in an undue manner. In fact, every returned
item needs to be sold again and then can be sent back yet
again [26]. Consequently, the cost impact does not end with
the planning period under consideration, but with the ﬁnal
sale. Second, the possibility of deterioration during the
revocation period is excluded, which equates to a decline in
value from a sales perspective.
A linear understanding of the sales process may be
sufﬁcient to successfully determine the contribution margin
for a planning period such as in Speights/Hilinski [31]. For
returns management tasks that go beyond that, the existing
understanding of the process is insufﬁcient for the reasons
noted above. Therefore, this article, in contrast to prior
publications, examines the issue by means of a circular
ﬂow as described in the following section.
To summarize the literature review, there are several
conceptual, empirical, and analytical essays regarding the
costs of returns. Existing publications provide insights into
the returns management process and provide an idea of
what returns actually cost. Analytical models build on these
observations and improve decision-making with regard to
inventory planning as well as selecting the best recovery
option. However, there remains a research gap concerning
the evaluation of preventive returns management activities.
This publication’s goal is a better understanding of the cost
impact of merchandise returns in mail-ordering to establish
a basis for a cost-beneﬁt analysis. It is intended to objectify

simple analytical model to determine the number of necessary orders and returns until the ﬁnal sale, with and
without the possibility of product deterioration. Although
mathematically savvy readers may argue that some of the
following appears trivial, it should be noted that practitioners often neglect and shy away from complex models.
Practitioners seek comprehensible and applicable tools and
solutions, which this article delivers.

3.2 Determining the number of necessary returns
until the ﬁnal sale
Since the buyer by deﬁnition does not return the goods with
the ﬁnal order, one can easily determine the average
number of necessary return processes NRðbÞ:
NRðbÞ ¼ NOðbÞ À 1 ¼
¼

3 Basic model of a circular sales process
and examination of returned goods’ cost impact
The circular model does not end with the revocation if the
consumer’s expectations are not met. Instead, the item is
transported back to the seller, where it is received, processed,
and stored. Subsequently, the goods are made available for
sale again. The higher the rate of returns b, the more times an
item must process through the cycle, shown in Fig. 2.
Therefore, the total costs determined by b are depended on
the number of times an article is ordered as well as the
number of returns until its ﬁnal sale. To assure a high level of
comparability between both models, it will be assumed that
each order is composed of a single item.

1
1
1Àb
À1¼
À
1Àb
1Àb 1Àb

b
:
1Àb

ð4Þ

Table 2 shows the quantity of necessary transactions in
relation to b. With the rate of returns set at 50 %, the seller
must turn the article over to two customers and process one
return. In contrast, setting b at 70 % leads to 3.33 sales and
2.33 returns processes on average.
3.3 Relation between the rate of returns
and the associated costs to determine
the important decision-making parameters
The resulting costs until an item is sold C ðbÞ depend on
NOðbÞ and NRðbÞ as well as the expense rates d and r:
C ðbÞ ¼ NOðbÞ Á d þ NRðbÞ Á r ¼

3.1 Determining the number of necessary order
placements until the ﬁnal sale

¼

1
b
Ádþ
Ár
1Àb
1Àb

dþbÁr
:
1Àb
ð5Þ

The probability of a single necessary order until the ﬁnal
sale is ð1 À bÞ, b Á ð1 À bÞ for two, b2 Á ð1 À bÞ for three,
and bNÀ1 Á ð1 À bÞ for N transactions. It follows implicitly
that the average number of necessary orders NOðbÞ is:
1
1
1
X
X
X
n Á bnÀ1 Á ð1 À bÞ ¼ 1 þ
bn ¼
bn :
NOðbÞ ¼
n¼1

n¼1

n¼0

ð2Þ
P1

bn is a convergent geometric series with the
individual term an ¼ bn and the common ratio
n¼0

Setting the parameter values to d ¼ $27:50 and
r ¼ $22:50, in accordance with the Speights/Hilinski [31]
example, creates the cost curve shown in Fig. 3.
The ﬁgure visualizes the disproportionate increase in
costs that coincides with an increase in the rate of returns b.
The linear relation suggested in Speights/Hilinski [31] or
Mondragon et al. [32] becomes untenable.
An item’s contribution margin CMarticle ðbÞ may now be
calculated by subtracting the costs incurred until the item is
sold C ðbÞ from the trade margin p À c:

nþ1

nþ1
q ¼ aan ¼ bbn ¼ b, for which we need to determine the
sum by observing the limit:

NOðbÞ ¼

1
X

bn ¼ lim

n¼0

Storage

i!1

i
X
n¼0

bn ¼

a0
1
:
¼
1Àq 1Àb

Processing

ð3Þ

CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ p À c À

dþbÁr
:
1Àb

ð6Þ

Comparing Eq. (1) with (6) illustrates the differences in contribution margins on the order and article

Receipt

Return transport
yes

Item is offered
for sale

Order

Delivery

Revocation?

no

Item is
sold

Fig. 2 Circular rendering of the sales process

ﬁnal sale of an item

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:3

Rate of returns b

0%

20 %

50 %

60 %

70 %

80 %

90 %
10

NOðbÞ

1

1.25

2

2.5

3.33

5

NRðbÞ

0

0.25

1

1.5

2.33

4

9

NOðbÞ þ NRðbÞ

1

1.5

3

4

5.66

9

19

Fig. 3 Visualization of the
returns rate’s cost impact
regarding the underlying model
(linear/circular)

400 €

Distribution and return costs up to the item's final sale
in the circular model

350 €
300 €

Costs per order based on the linear understanding of
the sales process found in Speights/Hilinski (2005)

250 €
200 €
150 €
100 €
50 €
0€
0%

10 %

20 %

30 %

40 %

50 %

60 %

70 %

80 %

90 %

100 %

Rate of returns ( β)

level. The spread results from the revocation rights
that may be used not only once but multiple times
until an order ﬁnally converts into a sale. On average,
this process requires NOðbÞ transactions. Therefore, the
relation between the two contribution margins is as
follows:
CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ NOðbÞ Á CMorder ðbÞ ¼

1
Á CMorder ðbÞ:
1Àb
ð7Þ

It should be noted that Eqs. (1), (6), and (7) describe two
overlapping effects. On the one hand, the order-based view
underestimates the expenditures subject to the return rate
when multiple forward and reverse handling is necessary.
On the other hand, the circular sales process represents
additional chances to sell the product, which is why the
absolute values of article-based margins are higher than the
order-based ones.
Additionally, it is useful to determine the bmax value
required to achieve a positive contribution margin for the
business; in other terms, CMarticle ðbÞ [ 0:
bmax \

pÀcÀd
:
pÀcþr

ð8Þ

Before investing in preventive activities, managers have
a reasonable desire to quantify the expected cost effect. If
they are able to assess the impact on the returns rate Db, the
percentage change in costs related to merchandise returns
DCOST % is determined as:

123

DCOST % ¼

dþðbþDbÞÁr
1ÀðbþDbÞ
dþbÁr
1Àb

À 1:

ð9Þ

Since certain measures inﬂuence not only the cost situation but also the revenue situation, company representatives will particularly want two additional questions
answered that pertain to preventive returns management:
•

•

What is the minimum increase required in orders/sales
to justify a rise in the rate of returns from b to b0
(b\b0 )?
To what extent may orders/sales decline to ensure that a
reduction in the rate of returns from b to b0 (b [ b0 )
leads to a positive overall effect?

The ﬁrst question is relevant to decision-makers who are
considering liberalizing their returns policy, which commonly accompanies a rise in the rate of returns [33]. The
second question mirrors a situation in which managers will
soon roll out new measures that will simultaneously reduce
the rate of returns while upsetting certain customer groups.
Common examples of this are not enclosing a returns
voucher, tightening the returns policy, or introducing a
restocking fee. To answer these questions, the contribution
margins achieved with the different scenarios need to be set
in relation to each other. In terms of the percentage change
for orders DORD % and sales DSALE %, this means:
DORD % ¼

CMorder ðbÞ
À 1;
CMorder ðb0 Þ


Page 7 of 12 3

CMarticle ðbÞ
À 1:
CMarticle ðb0 Þ

ð11Þ

The two effects are interconnected and basically represent two sides of the same coin. Developing (7) shows that:


1 À b0
DSALE % ¼ ðDORD % þ 1Þ Á
À 1:
ð12Þ
1Àb
3.4 Application of the model in a numerical example
This chapter ends with an example demonstrating the
applicability of the developed formulas. The object of
observation is a fashion mail-order retailer. The following
parameter values apply to the examined item: p ¼ 89 ¤,
c ¼ 29 ¤, d ¼ 12 ¤, r ¼ 8 ¤. The rate of returns is set to
b ¼ 50 %, a realistic value in the fashion industry [25].
Under these assumed values, the company attains an
average unit contribution margin of:
dþbÁr
1Àb
12 ¤ þ 0:5 Á 8 ¤
¼ 28 ¤:
¼ 89 ¤ À 29 ¤ À
1 À 0:5

CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ p À c À

Consequently, the product’s retail price ﬂoor that breaks
even with all else remaining equal is 89 ¤ À 28 ¤ ¼ 61 ¤.
Switching to the order perspective, the contribution margin
equals:
CMorder ðbÞ ¼ ð1 À bÞ Á CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ ð1 À 0:5Þ Á 28 ¤
¼ 14 ¤:
In addition, bmax signiﬁes the maximum return rate with
a positive value contribution:
pÀcÀd
pÀcþr
89 ¤ À 29 ¤ À 12 ¤
bmax \
89 ¤ À 29 ¤ þ 8 ¤
bmax \0:7059

bmax \

This means that the contribution margin slips into the
red as soon as the rate of returns crosses the threshold of
roughly 70 %.
When assessing the effectiveness of preventive measures, such as improving the instruction manual or adding
illustrations, an assumption of the expected effect on the
returns rate is required. A decrease by 5 % points, that is
Db ¼ À0:05, leads to:
DCOST % ¼
¼

À1¼

d þ b0 Á r
1 À b0
12 ¤ þ 0:55 Á 8 ¤
¼ 89 ¤ À 29 ¤ À
1 À 0:55
¼ 23:55 ¤;

CMarticle ðb0 Þ ¼ p À c À

CMorder ðb0 Þ ¼ p À c À d À b0 Á ðp À c þ r Þ
¼ 89 ¤ À 29 ¤ À 12 ¤ À 0:55 Á ð89 ¤ À 29 ¤ þ 8 ¤Þ
¼ 10:60 ¤:

Before adopting such a proposal, the expected effect on
earnings must be contrasted with the expected effect on
costs.
CMarticle ðbÞ
28 ¤
À 1 ¼ 0:1887
0 À1¼
23:55 ¤
CMarticle ðb Þ
¼ 18:87 %;

DSALE % ¼

CMorder ðbÞ
14 ¤
À 1 ¼ 0:3208
0 À1¼
10:60 ¤
CMorder ðb Þ
¼ 32:08 %:

DORD % ¼

In our example, sales must increase by at least 18.87 %
and orders by at least 32.08 % to balance the added costs.
If this appears realistic, the proposal should be adopted.

4 Extending the basic model with the possibility
of deterioration

bmax \70:59 %:

dþðb þ DbÞÁr
1ÀðbþDbÞ
dþbÁr
1Àb

Consequently, expenditures subject to the product
returns rate would decline by 11.36 %. The necessary
investments should not exceed the expected savings. Other
measures, such as aggressively promoting the free returns
options, may inﬂuence both costs and revenues. On the one
hand, this would generate more impulse purchases by
lowering reservations regarding ordering. On the other
hand, impulse purchases have been known to be returned at
a higher rate than usual [34]. In our example, an increase of
5 % points to b0 ¼ 55 % is predicted. The new article and
order contribution margins are:

12þð0:5 À 0:05ÞÁ8
1Àð0:5 À 0:05Þ
12 þ 0:5Á8
1À0:5

À1

28:36
À 1 ¼ À0:1136 ¼ À11:36 %:
32

Until now, this paper has focused on the fundamental
connection between the rate of returns and the associated
costs. A more realistic portrayal of the sales and return
process needs to integrate deterioration, either through
usage or during the transportation processes. Therefore,
businesses evaluate the item’s condition and assign a disposition option. Referring to Norek [19], the model is
extended to consider the most important salvaging options,
that is, (a) sell as new, (b) repair or repackage and resell as
new, and (c) write off and replace the product with a new
one after either selling the return to a salvage house or
disposing of it (refer to Fig. 4). Therefore, it is necessary to
distinguish between A-, B-, and C-returns.


Re-Conditioning
B-return p(B)

Processing

A-return
p(A)

CondiƟon?

Receipt

C-return p(C)
Write-oﬀ/
replacement

Storage

Return transport
yes

Item is oﬀered
for sale

Order

Delivery

RevocaƟon?

no

Item is sold

Fig. 4 Circular rendering of the sales process while considering the item condition

A-returns are considered to be in a ﬂawless state and can
be resold immediately, which is why merely the base
expense rate r is incurred. B-returns require minor work
before they can be resold (i.e., changing of the packaging or
minor repairs), leading to additional processing expenses e.
C-returns cannot be reconditioned for sale on the primary
market. In this case, the seller must write off the purchase
price c. Should the vendor be able to sell the goods to a
salvage house, this ﬁgure will be reduced by the received
compensation m. However, should the seller be forced to
bear waste disposal costs, m will be assigned a negative
value. Table 3 summarizes the decision-making process.
4.1 Model adjustment to consider different item
conditions

Hence, the unit contribution margin changes to:
CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ p À c
d þ b Á ðr þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðCÞ Á ðc À mÞÞ
:
À
1Àb
ð15Þ
The formula for the maximum return rate that generates
a positive contribution margin bmax is adapted to:
bmax \

pÀcÀd
:
p À c þ r þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðC Þ Á ðc À mÞ

A ﬁnal adjustment is required for the percentage change
in costs:
DCOST % ¼

Based on this information, the order contribution margin
can be calculated in consideration of the heterogeneous
item conditions. Building on the base model introduced in
the previous section, damages e as well as c À m will be
additionally considered with their likelihood of occurrence
pðBÞ and pðC Þ, respectively. Adjusting Eq. (1) leads to:
CMorder ðbÞ ¼ ð1 À bÞ Á ðp À c À d Þ
À b Á ð r þ d þ p ð B Þ Á e þ p ð C Þ Á ð c À mÞ Þ
¼ p À c À d À b Á ðp À c þ r þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðC Þ Á ðc À mÞÞ:

ð13Þ
Accordingly, the cost factors affected by the rate of returns
must be adjusted. Since damages in relation to pðBÞ and pðCÞ
could occur during each return process, it follows that:
C ðbÞ ¼ NOðbÞ Á d þ NRðbÞ Á r þ NRðbÞ Á pðBÞ Á e
þ NRðbÞ Á pðC Þ Á ðc À mÞ
¼

d þ b Á ð r þ p ð BÞ Á e þ p ð C Þ Á ð c À m Þ Þ
:
1Àb

123

ð14Þ

ð16Þ

dþðbþDbÞÁðrþpðBÞÁeþpðC ÞÁðcÀmÞÞ
1ÀðbþDbÞ
dþbÁðrþpðBÞÁeþpðC ÞÁðcÀmÞÞ
1Àb

À 1:

ð17Þ

The equations for DORD % and DSALE % remain valid.

4.2 Integrating different item conditions
in the numerical example
Building on the numerical example introduced in
Sect. 3.4, the set parameter values remain valid. However, now, only 90 % of the returns are in a resalable
condition. Seven percent show minor damages that can
be corrected. This involves average processing costs of
6 €. Three percent of the returns are sold to a salvage
house that pays 5 € for each return. This leaves us with
pð AÞ ¼ 0:9, pðBÞ ¼ 0:07, pðC Þ ¼ 0:03, e ¼ 6 ¤, and
m ¼ 5 ¤.
By additionally considering the item condition, the
unit contribution equals 26.86 € instead of the previous

Table 3 Possible item conditions and their economic consequences
Disposition option

Probabilities pð AÞ þ pðBÞ þ pðC Þ ¼ 1

Description

Additional cost

A-return

Indistinguishable from new goods

pð AÞ

–

B-return

Goods with minor damage

pðBÞ

e

C-return

Goods that are no longer sellable

pðC Þ

cÀm

d þ b Á ðr þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðCÞ Á ðc À mÞÞ
1Àb
¼ 89 ¤ À 29 ¤

CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ p À c À

12 ¤ þ 0:5 Á ð8 ¤ þ 0:07 Á 6 ¤ þ 0:03 Á ð29 ¤ À 5 ¤ÞÞ
1 À 0:5
¼ 26:86 ¤:
À

Hence, deterioration reduces the possible price ﬂoor at
which the product breaks even. The order contribution
margin diminishes from 14 € to 13.43 €:
CMorder ðbÞ ¼ ð1 À bÞ Á CMarticle ðbÞ ¼ ð1 À 0:5Þ Á 26:86 ¤
¼ 13:43 ¤:
Similarly, the maximum rate of returns with a positive
contribution margin declines to:
pÀcÀd
p À c þ r þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðC Þ Á ðc À mÞ
89 ¤ À 29 ¤ À 12 ¤
bmax \
89 ¤ À 29 ¤ þ 8 ¤ þ 0:07 Á 6 ¤ þ 0:03 Á ð29 ¤ À 5 ¤Þ
bmax \0:6942
bmax \

bmax \69:42 %:

Referring to the preventive tasks of returns management, the possibility of deterioration enhances the effect of
avoiding and preventing return shipments. A decline of b
by 5 % points to 45 % would reduce expenditures subject
to the returns rate by 13.67 %:
DCOST % ¼

dþðbþDbÞÁðrþpðBÞÁeþpðC ÞÁðcÀmÞÞ
1ÀðbþDbÞ
dþbÁðrþpðBÞÁeþpðC ÞÁðcÀmÞÞ
1Àb

d þ b0 Á ðr þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðC Þ Á ðc À mÞÞ
1 À b0
¼ 89 ¤ À 29 ¤

CMarticle ðb0 Þ ¼ p À c À

12 ¤ þ 0:55 Á ð8 ¤ þ 0:07 Á 6 ¤ þ 0:03 Á ð29 ¤ À 5 ¤ÞÞ
1 À 0:55
¼ 22:16 ¤;
À

CMorder ðb0 Þ ¼ p À c À d À b0 Á ðp À c þ r þ pðBÞ Á e þ pðC Þ Á ðc À mÞÞ
¼ 89 ¤ À 29 ¤ À 12 ¤ À 0:55
Á ð89 ¤ À 29 ¤ þ 8 ¤ þ 0:07 Á 6 ¤ þ 0:03 Á ð29 ¤ À 5 ¤ÞÞ
¼ 9:97 ¤:

Once again, the expected effect on earnings must be
compared with the expected effect on costs.
CMarticle ðbÞ
26:86 ¤
À 1 ¼ 0:2121
À1¼
22:16 ¤
CMarticle ðb0 Þ
¼ 21:21 %;

DSALE % ¼

CMorder ðbÞ
13:43 ¤
À 1 ¼ 0:3466
À1¼
9:97 ¤
CMorder ðb0 Þ
¼ 34:66 %:

DORD % ¼

The possibility of deterioration leads to additional costs
that require more orders and sales to be compensated,
making it less likely to have an overall positive impact.
Adapting this case shows that once deterioration in the
item’s condition is considered, the disproportionate
increase in costs is further ampliﬁed.

5 Implications of model results
À1

¼

12þð0:5À0:05ÞÁð8þ0:07Á6 ¤þ0:03Áð29 ¤À5 ¤ÞÞ
1Àð0:5À0:05Þ
12þ0:5Áð8þ0:07Á6 ¤þ0:03Áð29 ¤À5 ¤ÞÞ
1À0:5

¼

28:61
À 1 ¼ À0:1367 ¼ À13:67 %:
33:14

À1

The increase compared to the previously determined
11.36 % justiﬁes higher investments in preventive measures. Beyond that the impact of a free returns promotion
needs to be tested under the new conditions. Increasing the
rate of returns to b0 ¼ 55 % results in an article and an
order contribution margin of:

The presented model leads to a range of theoretical and
practical implications. Theoretically, it analyzes the relation between the rate of returns and the costs of returning
goods, which is critical for the success of mail-order
businesses. In contrast to previous publications, the sales
process has been rendered in a circular manner. The model
shows that the costs associated with a rise in the rate of
returns do not increase linearly, as the results of Speights/
Hilinski [31] or Mondragon et al. [32] imply. Although
their order-based approach is well suited to determining the
contribution margin for a single period, it obscures the real
disproportionate relation. This effect is further ampliﬁed by
deterioration, either through usage within the revocation

processes.
Hence, the article contribution margin differs from the
order contribution margin and decreases more lopsidedly
as the rate of returns rises. Acknowledging this difference
is vital for accurately predicting an item’s potential for
success, determining its retail price and price ﬂoor as well
as evaluating the implementation of preventive measures.
Therefore, this publication complements the existing range
of analytical models, which primarily improved decisionmaking concerning inventory management and product
recovery [23–30]. In contrast, this paper objectiﬁes decisions regarding the prevention and avoidance of returns
before they actually occur.
Moreover, the developed circular model shows that the
product returns should not be viewed as isolated from the
forward-directed ﬂow of materials. The more often a product is returned, the more times it has to be ordered and
shipped, leading to additional distribution costs.
This ﬁnding leads to practical implications. To maximize proﬁts, it is necessary to coordinate the returns
management process with traditional corporate functions,
particularly with marketing/sales and logistics. Management must ensure that function-speciﬁc goals and activities
targeting the success of the business are in harmony.
It is understandable that from a marketing perspective,
one would want to design the returns process to be as
simple and as accommodating as possible. However,
market and sales success does not inherently lead to business success. Conversely, excessive focus on costs should
also be critically scrutinized because the pursued measures
potentially impede additional turnover. Therefore, businesses should target a balanced approach that integrates
both sides of the same coin: that is, focusing on customer
satisfaction without losing sight of cost-effectiveness. This
requires an integrative stance and is closely related to the
decision on which preventive measures to adopt. Both
avoidance and gatekeeping reduce the number of returns to
be processed.
The German fashion retailer Bonprix, for example, adds
3 € of store credit to a customer’s account for orders that
are not returned [35]. According to the model results, the
likelihood that these types of avoidance investments will
permanently improve operating results increases with the
rate of returns. Gatekeeping measures are less popular in
business practice because sellers fear the negative inﬂuence
these may have on customer satisfaction and the generated
turnover. Nonetheless, the use of these measures should not
be categorically excluded from the realm of possibilities. It
is essential to verify whether the reduction in costs associated with the diminished rate of returns can sufﬁciently
compensate for the decline in orders. Only recently,
Amazon decided to close several accounts, providing the

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:3

following justiﬁcation [36]: ‘‘[…] a careful review of this
account and related ones shows you’ve requested refunds
and replacements on a majority of your orders for a variety
of reasons. In the normal course of business, we expect
there may be occasional problems. However, the rate at
which such problems have occurred on your account is
extraordinary, and it cannot continue. Your Amazon.com
account has been closed, and you will no longer be able to
shop in our store.’’ Since Amazon is known as an extremely data-driven enterprise, it can be assumed that the pros
and cons were thoroughly weighed prior to this decision
and that the expected reduction in costs tipped the scales in
favor of the suspension of deliveries.
Another takeaway is that the possibility of deterioration
ampliﬁes the aforementioned effects. Therefore, distance
sellers should work on smart solutions that increase the
proportion of A- or B-returns, which may be resold as new
after minor rework, to minimize value depreciation. Such
an approach can be observed at Amazon. Amazon cooperates with manufacturers to box products in so-called
Amazon Certiﬁed Frustration-Free Packaging [37]. The
packaging beneﬁts consumers because it is easy to open
and causes less waste. However, it is also advantageous for
Amazon since damaged packaging can be easily replaced,
which reduces the quantity of unsellable C-returns.

6 Conclusions and further research
This paper introduced a circular model for the sales and
returns process in a mail-order context. Geometric series
have been used to describe the relation between the rate of
returns and related costs. The advantage of this basic model
is that even less mathematically savvy practitioners can
easily apply it and improve their decision-making by
replacing gut feelings with facts.
Referring to the three research questions posed in the
beginning, the major lesson learned from this article is
that preventive actions play a pivotal role in successfully
running a mail-order business. The evaluation of such
activities requires (1) estimates regarding a measure’s
effect on the likelihood of ordering and returning, (2)
information about an article’s trade margin, and (3) data
on the distribution and return costs. The ﬁndings suggest
that distance sellers with high return rates are very likely
to beneﬁt from avoidance and gatekeeping. Such businesses should also reﬂect upon tightening their returns
policies. In contrast, vendors with low return rates should
critically review preventive options. Moreover, because
of the described disproportionate relation, the latter
vendors are often better off loosening their policies,
making product returns easier and more convenient for
be regarded as a plea to constantly improve merchandise
returns handling as it has a direct impact on administrative,
processing, and disposition costs. The lower these costs,
the less steeply will the cost function subject to the returns
rate rise. Therefore, mail-order businesses are strongly
recommended to seize every opportunity to streamline
internal processes, negotiate lower shipping charges, and
improve the product recovery rate. An optimal returns
management strategy embraces both preventive measures
and the efﬁcient handling of inevitable returns.
Finally, this work should stimulate further research. To
deduce conclusions concerning the success potential of the
preventive returns management, it is necessary to investigate
the speciﬁc impact of avoidance and gatekeeping measures.
It remains unclear, for example, to what degree the rate of
returns is reduced if a business implements same-day
delivery instead of a two- to three-day delivery time. To
answer these types of questions, in-depth case studies are
necessary. From an analytical perspective, model extensions
provide the opportunity to investigate follow-up problems.
This includes the evaluation of disposition strategies other
than those included, such as redistributing returns through
stationary trade (i.e., Tchibo Outlets). Another idea would be
a model extension that distinguishes costs per item, per
order, and per customer and relates to well-known schemes
such as activity-based costing.
In closing, we again take on the previously depicted
positive development that mail-ordering has experienced. In
the past, market players were able to win over a signiﬁcant
sales volume that had once belonged to the stationary trade.
Currently, there appears to be no solid arguments for why this
development will be reversed. The positive picture is tarnished by the fact that consumer-friendly return policies
have led to an increase in the rate of returns, a trend that is
expected to continue [21]. This article can be viewed as a
general plea not to lose sight of the return costs while
addressing future growth. Only then can survival and competitiveness be permanently guaranteed. A forceful implementation of the analytical decision-making aids developed
in this article will contribute to the affected retailers’ ability
to achieve proﬁtable growth in a sustainable manner.
Acknowledgments The author would like to thank the two
anonymous reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments
that contributed to improving the ﬁnal version of the paper.

