

Introduction
The End-of-Life Vehicles (ELV) directive [13] is a key strategy in tackling the large amount of
waste vehicles generated within the EU each year – between 2006 and 2014 EU member states
recorded approximately 59 million tonnes [14]. The key focus of the ELV directive is to force
vehicles away from landfill and towards product and material recovery strategies such as
recycle and reuse. Further, the ELV directive also places high disposal avoidance expectations
(disposal being any operation which is not a recovery operation) on member states; consider
targets applicable for 2015 (on onwards) that state a minimum of 95% (per average weight of
vehicle) should be subjected to reuse and recovery and that a minimum of 85% (per average
weight of vehicle) should be subjected to reuse and recycling per year.
To tackle other forms of waste, for example municipal and electronic and electrical, the EU
has also introduced additional directives such as the Waste Framework (WF) directive [12] and
Waste of Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) directive [11]. Similar to the ELV
directive, strategies to avoid disposal such as recycling, recovery and reuse are again identified.
The process of remanufacturing is however not discussed in the ELV, the WF or WEE
directive directly or indeed in any EU directive.
Given that remanufacturing restores used products to at least virgin like performance and
returns them to the market place with a warranty at least as good as original [17–19, 22, 25, 26,
33] the absence of remanufacturing in the ELV directive is of particular interest, especially
when the established footprint that remanufacturing has in the automotive industry is
considered.
With a view to establishing remanufacturing as a stand-alone process within the ELV
directive going forward, this research seeks to identify the compatibility of remanufacturing, as
agreed upon by leading global automotive remanufacturing associations, within the current
ELV directive. This research investigates where remanufacturing currently resides within the
ELV directive, identifies obstacles, with a strong focus on ‘waste’ terminology, to the insertion
of remanufacturing directly into the ELV directive presents a workable solution to incorporating remanufacturing moving forward.
The structure of this research is thus; firstly a frame of reference is provided by
documenting the definition of remanufacturing as agreed upon by leading global automotive
remanufacturers. Justification for this research is then given. Following this, through examination of the various landfill avoidance strategies within the ELV directive, this manuscript
presents for the first time in literature, an analysis of where remanufacturing currently resides
with the ELV directive. The obstacles of incorporating remanufacturing into the ELV directive
directly are then presented with the issues of waste taking a strong focus. Moving forward, a
workable solution to the introduction of remanufacturing as a standalone process within the
ELV directive is presented. Lastly, a conclusion is presented.


25

remanufacturing from refurbishing and recondition or [16], who found that remanufacturing in
the aerospace industry is sometimes referred to as rebuilding.
Given that this research investigates the presence of remanufacturing in the ELV directive, a
recently agreed upon definition of remanufacturing from leading global automotive
remanufacturing associations, [3], is presented in this work. Supporting this robust definition
is an additional two matching definitions from literature [5, 8]. These definitions are given in
Table 1.
Remanufacturing is commonly conducted on products referred to as cores. The automotive
associations, define a core as,
“A core is a previously sold, worn or non-functional product or part, intended for the
remanufacturing process. During reverse logistics, a core is protected, handled and
identified for remanufacturing to avoid damage and to preserve its value. A core is not
waste or scrap and is not intended to be reused before remanufacturing” [4],
While not explicit in the above definition in that a single product may be classed as a core,
typically a core is series of assembled components, for example an automotive engine. [29],
describe a core as a
“…product constructed through a manufacturing assembly process involving different
parts” [29],
Further, a typical remanufacturing operation involves 6 generic processes; (1) acceptance and
cleaning of a core, (2) the disassembly or stripping of a core, (3) the cleaning of core
components, (4) rebuilding, restoration and replacement of non-remanufacturable core parts,
(5) core assembly or re-assembly and (6) core testing [5, 21–23, 27–29, 30, 31, 33]. Fig. 1 is
given to reinforce the general process of core remanufacture.
Moving forward, the importance of understanding the role of remanufacturing in the ELV
directive is now discussed.

Table 1 Definitions of remanufacturing cited from literature
Remanufacturing definitions
Source

Definition

• “Remanufacturing is a standardized industrial process* by which cores are
returned to same-as-new, or better, condition and performance. The process is in
line with specific technical specifications, including engineering, quality and
testing standards. The process yields fully warranted products.”
“*An industrial process is an established process, which is fully documented, and
capable to fulfil the requirements established by the remanufacturer.”
British National Standards “return a used product to at least its original performance with a warranty that is
Body, [5]
equivalent or better than that of the newly manufactured product”
European Action Plan [8] “A series of manufacturing steps acting on an end-of-life part or product in order to
return it to like-new or better performance, with corresponding warranty.”

Automotive Association
[3]*

*Noting that the Automotive associations is a collection automotive remanufacturing bodies/organizations which
came together to agree upon common remanufacturing terminology. These remanufacturers include; (CLEPA),
The European Association of Automotive Suppliers, (MERA), the Motor & Equipment Remanufacturers


Fig. 1 The 6 generic steps
involved in the remanufacturing
process

Clean
Core

Strip
Core

Clean Core
components
Failed
product

Restore, rebuild or
replace components

Reassemble
Core

Test

Remanufactured
Product

The importance of promoting remanufacturing as a standalone processes
within the ELV directive
The main drivers for promoting remanufacturing within the ELV directive are a) the environmental benefits of remanufacturing, b) the removal of ambiguity in process, and c) the

27

offer significant solutions here; Sutherland et al., [35] predicted substantial energy savings
when comparing remanufactured and virgin manufactured diesel engines, The Automotive
Parts Remanufactures Association (APRA) [2], state that rebuilt or remanufactuered engines
save over 50% of the energy compared to the production of new engines, while Sundin et al.
[34], found through case study analysis of various European wide practicing remanufacturers
that energy savings, in some cases extreme savings of up to 85%, can be found in some
automotive remanufactured products. Additionally, Sundin and Lee [32], examined
remanufacturing and the environment and identified further literature to document energy
savings associated with gearboxes, alternators and truck injectors.
Looking now at ambiguity in definition. If remanufacturing or remanufacturing processes
are residing ambigously within cross national legislation, difficulties in quickly gauging the
remanufacturing market can begin to develop. For example, given that the EU documents
recycling, reuse and recovery rates each year, (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat), if remanufacturing
process were included under recycling, reuse and recovery, it is entirely feasible that these
statistics to some degree are defining remanufacturing processes, thus an additional barrier for
gauging true remanufacturing market is introduced. An additional validation of this concept is
documented by Lund and Hauser [25]. The authors found that previous research, [24], had
overestimated the size of the american remanufacturing industry by virtue of a liberal
definition of remanfacturing and by relying on a supply of information from trade
associations who reported only very loose remanufacturing processes as remanufacturing.
An additionally point stemming from this argument is that along with issues such as
branding and price, ambiguity over definition can affect the customers decision to purchase
remanufactured products [1, 18, 20]. Thus, establishing remanufacturing as a standalone
disposal avoidance strategy would in part help to alleviate confusion over performance and
quality, in that remanufactured products would be clearly identified with remanufacturers
being accountable to meet set standards.
In terms of waste reduction, additional justification can be drawn from the ELV directive
itself. Consider, article 4 point 1(c) of the ELV directive,
“Vehicle manufacturers, in liaison with material and equipment manufacturers, to
integrate an increasing quantity of recycled material in vehicles and other products,
in order to develop the markets for recycled materials.”
Given a large amount of products able to be remanufactured, such as engines, compressors,
starter motors, brake callipers, power steering pumps, distributors, hydraulic pumps and gear
boxes, [6], remanufacturing produces parts directly suitable for incorporation into new vehicles
and components. Further, there is no doubt in the performance of remanufactured products,
they are ‘as good as new’, which is not necessarily the case for recycled products, and so by
encouraging vehicle manufactures to use ‘as good as new’ or remanufactured products there
follows less objection to integrating these parts in new products on grounds of product quality
concerns.
Lastly, recent external precedent also supports the concept that remanufacturing should be
defined as a standalone process; consider the United States Government Federal Repair Cost
Savings Act, [15]. The repair cost savings act states that the head of each federal agency is
encouraged to use remanufactured vehicle components to maintain federal vehicles, where


remanufacturing terminology into the WF directive, [10], then future remanufacturing terminology being introduced in the ELV is a distinct possibility. Future terminology of course
would define remanufacturing legally, and so additional rationale as to why it is important for
remanufacturing to emerge from the existing practices is identified.

Where remanufacturing resides within the ELV directive
Table 2 identifies key terminology upon which the goals of the ELV directive are built upon.
Additionally, the relationship this terminology has to the remanufacturing definition agreed
upon by the automotive associations, from the perspective of the authors, is also given.
Prior to discussing the findings from Table 2, it should be stated in the first instance that the
concept of waste was ignored. The issue of regarding cores as waste or non-waste and the
subsequent impact, is presented after this discussion.
From Table 2, it is evident that remanufacturing is indirectly accounted for in the ELV
directive, and is able to be potentially thought of as a prevention operation, a treatment
operation, a reuse operation, a recovery operation, and a recycling operation. Further,
remanufactuers liberally could also in some circumstances be classed as producers, economic
operators, and treatment operators, noting that in the last case they should be supplied with
correct vehicle dismantling information. Each subject is now briefly discussed.
Considering first, prevention. The theme of prevention is to reduce the amount and
environmental impact of End-of-Life (EoL) vehicles, substances and materials. With
remanufacturing offering energy and material savings, and able to return a used product back
to the market place at a competitive price, it is clear that remanufacturing is capable of being
classed as a prevention measure.
As for reuse, recycling and recovery. Recovery is defined as any operation from a list of
operations outlined in a 1975 waste directive [7]. This directive is a forerunner to the WF directive
[12] and so, the actual recovery operations are listed in the latter directive. The WF directive
recovery operations listed, are not generally akin to the process of remanufacturing, however the
WF directive states that this list is non-exhaustive and gives a definition of a recovery operation given as 2.8** in Table 2. Using this definition, then it is evident that remanufacturing could be
classed as a recovery operation, again if the concept of waste is ignored.
Defintion 2.6 identifies reuse as any operation in which components of ELV’s are used for
the same purpose for which they were conceived. Remanufacturing, in the authors’ opinion
falls within this category. Further, it is also the case that reuse terminolgy allows for instances
of a restored component (as a result of remanfuacturing) being used in the manfuacture of a
new core, or in the rebuilding of a different core.
In the case of recycling, remanufacturing processes could also liberally fall under recycling
terminolgoy of the ELV. While remanufacturing is a distinct process separate from recycling,
given that remanufactured materials are reprocessed in a production process for the original or
other purpose, an argument can be made to suggest a liberal association with remanufacturing
and recycling in this instance. Additionally, recyling is thought of as a form of recovery
operation, therefore classing recycling as a recovery operation, to some extent forces

29

Table 2 Definitions of terminology cited from the End of life vehicles directive (European Parliament and
Council, 2000) and waste framework directive (European Parliament and Council, 2008), including the applicability to remanufacturing
Terminology defintions from ELV and WF directive and applicablity to remanufacturing
Section Definition
2.1

2.2 *

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.8**

2.9

“Vehicle means any vehicle designated as
category M1 or N1 defined in Annex 2A to
Directive 92/61/EEC, but excluding motor
tricycles”
“‘End of life’ vehicles means a vehicle which is
waste within the meaning of Article 1(a) of
Directive 75/442/EEC”

Applicibility to remanufacturing
N/A

Applicable to remanufacturing. Ignoring the issues
of [4] who state ‘cores’ are not waste, then EoL
vehicles are the products or cores suitable for
remanfuacturing.
N/A

“‘Producer’ means the vehicle manufacturer or
the professional importer of a vehicle into a
member state”
Applicable to remanufacturing. Remanufacturing
“‘Prevention’ means measures aiming at the
accounts for material and energy savings when
reduction of the quantity and the harmfulness
compared to new [21, 23]. Thus
for the environment for end of life vehilces, their
remanufacturing may be regarded as a
materials and substances.”
prevention operation.
“‘Treatment’ means any activity after the end-of Applicable to remanufacturing. Once deposited in
a treatment facility, remanufacturing, which
life vehicle has been handed over to a facility
may be regarded as a recovery operation could
for depollution, dismantling, shearing,
occur. Thus remanufacturing may in some
shredding, recovery or preparation for disposal
circumstances be regarded as treatment
of the shredder wastes, and any other operation
operation.
carried out for the recovery and/or disposal of
the end-of life vehicle and its components”
Applicable to remanufacturing. Considering some
“‘reuse’ means any operation by which
parts in a used prodcut may be suitable for
components of end-of life vehicles are used for
direct reuse in a remanufactured part, or even
the same purpose for which they were conlightly restored and re-used then reuse is appliceived”
cable to remanfuacturing..
‘recycling’ means the reprocessing in a production Applicable to remanufacturing. Recycling
involves the reprocessing in a production
process of the waste materials for the original
process of waste materials to create new
purpose or for other purposes but excluding
energy recovery. Energy recovery means the use
products. Considering
of combustible waste as a means to generate
Remanufacturing restores or rebuilds products
energy through direct incineration with or
back to as good as new condition, then in some
without other waste but with recovery of the
instances remanufacturing processes could fall
heat;
under some recycling processes. Note
additionally, recycling is a type of recovery
operation.
‘recovery’ means any of the applicable operations
provided for in Annex IIB to Directive
75/442/EEC;
Applicable to remanufacturing. Remanufacturing
“‘recovery’ means any operation the principal
is able to clearly demonstrated as a recovery
result of which is waste serving a useful
operation
purpose by replacing other materials which
would otherwise have been used to fulfil a
particular function, or waste being prepared to
fulfil that function, in the plant or in the wider
economy. Annex II sets out a non-exhaustive list
of recovery operations”
“Disposal’ means any of the applicable operations Not applicable to remanufacturing.
Remanufactuing is not considered a disposal


Table 2 (continued)
Terminology defintions from ELV and WF directive and applicablity to remanufacturing
Section Definition
2.10

2.11

2.12

2.13

“‘economic operators’ means producers,
distributors, collectors, motor vehicle insurance
companies, dismantlers, shredders, recoverers,
recyclers and other treatment operators of
end-of life vehicles, including their components
and materials”
“‘hazardous substance’ means any substance
which fulfils the criteria for any of the following
hazard classes or categories set out in Annex I
of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and
packaging of substances and
(a) hazard classes 2.1 to 2.4, 2.6 and 2.7, 2.8 types
A and B, 2.9, 2.10, 2.12, 2.13 categories 1 and
2, 2.14 categories 1 and 2, 2.15 types A to F;
(b) hazard classes 3.1 to 3.6, 3.7 adverse effects on
sexual function and fertility or on development,
3.8 effects other than narcotic effects, 3.9 and
3.10;
(c) hazard class 4.1;
(d) hazard class 5.1;
“‘shredder’ means any device used for tearing
into pieces or fragmenting end-of life vehicles,
including for the purpose of obtaining directly
reusable metal scrap”
“‘dismantling information’ means all information
required for the correct and environmentally
sound treatment of end-of life vehicles. It shall
be made available to authorised treatment facilities by vehicle manufacturers and component producers in the form of manuals or by
means of electronic media (e.g. CD-ROM,
on-line services).”

Applicibility to remanufacturing
Applicable to remanufacturing. Recovery
operations, recyclers, and treatment operations
may to some degree be thought of as
remanufacturing. Thus in this case
remanufacturers may be thought of as economic
operators.
Not applicable

Not applicable to remanufacturing.
Remanufactuing is not considered a shredding
operation.
Application to remanufacturing. If
remanufacturing falls under what is classed as
treatment, then treatment operators should
receive the required information

*The definition of waste cited in 75/442/EEC has gone through various revions and is now defined in the WF
directive as “any substance or object which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard”
**Similar to above, 75/442/EEC is any older version of the WF directive, which presents an updated Annex II.
However the WF directives gives a definition of recovery and states that the list presented in Annex II is nonexhaustive. Hence, the recovery definition from the WF directive is used for this research

potential for remanufacturing to be classed as a recovery operation, remanufacturing must also
therefore have the potential to be classed as a treatment operation. Further, similar to previous
argument, if remanufacturing processes are being conducted at treatment facilities, there is
potential for treatment facilities to be classed liberally as remanufactuing facilities in some cases.
Further, definition 2.10 states that recoverers, recyclers, and treatement operators, are classed as

31

Note that Fig. 2 involves a heirarchy system; recycling, recovery and reuse are classed as
treatment operations, treatment operators are classed as economic operators, and economic
operators fall within prevention measures.
It must be stated however that while remanuacturing falls under recycling, reuse and
recovery operations, not every recycling, reuse or recovery operation is remanufacture and
therefore under no circumstances should recycling, reuse and recovery be used interchangebly
with remanfuacturing. Consider for instance, recycling a plastic bottle. The bottle is recycled
via being melted down and a new product can be manuactured. This is not in any circumstances a remanufacturing process. However, if a core component is cleaned, disassembled,
had it’s core components restored, rebuilt or perhaps even replaced or reprocessed to create
new products, and then rebuilt and so no longer constitues a waste, then the original core
component could perhaps be considered to be reprocessed in a production processes (definition of recycle within ELV) to a given degree. More often than not, recycling will not overlap
with remanfuacture, however, owing to remanufacturing not being defined in the ELV,
potential exists for current degrees of overlap to be apparent. A similar argument holds for
reuse and recovery, and for treatment operations.
The conclusion is that given a lack of explicit remanufacturing terminolgy in the ELV
directive, remanufacturing being a legitimate disposal avoidance strategy is forced to have a
presence in prevention measures, recycling, recovery and reuse with remanufacturers themselves able to be classed in some circumstances liberally as economic operators and treatment
operators.

Evidence of waste in remanufacturing definitions
Examining now the concept of waste and non-waste; the remanufacturing definitions outlined
in Table 1 are in reference to waste are examined.
The automotive associations [4], state that remanufacutring returns cores, issused with a full


proir to remanufacturing. It is clear that the automotive associations do not class cores as
waste, and thus remanufacturing should occur on products or cores that are not classed as
waste.
Reviewing now the BSI definition [5], there is no direct indication that remanufacturing is
required to be exclusively conducted on products or cores classed as waste. The definition only
states that remanufacturing is conducted on used products, thus both waste and non-waste
could fall within this category.
Looking now the last definition in Table 1, [8]. This definition states that a series of
manufacturing steps (typically the remanufacturing processes) are conducted on an EoL part or
product. There is no further explanation of whether EoL is thought of as waste, however, if the
European Action Plan is read in conjunction with the ELV directive, then it is reasonable to
assume that EoL in this case refers to ELV’s, which are indeed waste.
It can be said therefore, that the three definitions have alternating views on whether
remanufacturing is conducted on waste. The automotive associations definitively state that
remanufacturing is conducted on products which are not waste, the BSI defnintion is not
explicit in stating that used products should be classed on waste or non-waste, just that they are
previously used, and the European Action Plan infers that remanufacturing is conducted on
waste if read in conjunction with ELV directive, but other wise has no preference.
Judging by the principle that parts created specifically for vehicles are subject to the ELV
directive and not other directives, [9], the distinction from the automotive associations that
cores are not waste is very important when seeking to implement remanufacturing into the
ELV directive.

Obstacles to incorporating remanufacturing into the ELV directive
Waste problem
By setting aside the issue of waste, this research has shown that remanufacturing processes are
to some degree embedded into recycling, recovery and reuse operations of the ELV directive.
Examining now the issue of waste, obstacles to incorporating remanufacturing into the ELV
directive are apparent. Consider the following scenarios.
Automotive remanufacturers such as an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) may offer
a leasing or rental based business model. In this circumstance, the registered keeper of the
vehicle (the person who is using the car) does not own the vehicle but instead the vehicle
owner is the party who is leasing or renting the car to the registered keeper i.e. the OEM.
Under this system, when the registered keeper returns the vehicle to the registered owner, the
vehicle is not waste, given that the registered keeper cannot discard something that they do not
own. Therefore an OEM remanufacturer can potentially conduct remanfuacturing operations
on non-waste vehicles. (which is in line with the automotive associations description of a
core).
Now consider an independent remanufacturer (IR) who may obtain vehicle components
from an authorised treatment facility (ATF); noting that when the vehicle reaches the ATF, it is
considered a waste. In this instance, the ATF has a responsibility under the ELV to ensure they

33

Analysing these scenarios, and looking first at the OEM example. Remanufacturing in this
instance is conducted on non-waste. While this is acceptable from the view of the automotive
assoications, this is not generally acceptable from the persepective of the ELV directive; given
that ELV directive is focused on waste avoidance any recovery strategy housed within the
directive can presumably only apply to waste. Thus, a fundamental conflict appears within
literature; from the ELV directive perspective, remanufacturing would only occur at the waste
stage, whereas from the automotive associations perspective, remanufacturing would only
occur at the usage stage i.e. before the products become waste. This distinction stops the
automotive associations definition of remanufacturing being adopted unabridged into the ELV
directive.
Examining now the case of the IR who obtain cores from an ATF and perform
remanufacturing operations (Fig. 1). Given that the cores are taken from an ATF, the cores
must be thought of as waste, thus remanufacturing in this instance is not in agreement with
how automotive associations view remanfuacturing. Again, difficulty in adopting the
remanufacturing definition from the automotive associations unabridged is shown.

Establishing remanufacturing as a stand alone strategy
In addition to the issues accociated with waste, establishing remanufacturing as a standalone
waste avoidance strategy is a further hurdle that needs adressed.
Given that recycle, reuse and remanufacturing are understood as separate processes
within literature [17, 21, 23, 26–30] and noting that literature’s opinion or viewpoint is
formed by studying operations conducted within industry, it is important to remain
consistent with existing litearture. However, it has thus far been shown that
remanufacturing has potentially a presence in recycle and reuse, which are both recovery
operations of the ELV directive. It can be stated therefore that in addition to incorporating
an abridged version of the remanufacturing definition from the automotive assoications
into the ELV directive, further work is also required to clearly separate remanufacturing
from recycle and reuse.
Additionally, consider the stipulation of the ELV directive that dismantling information is
all the necessary information required for the environmentally sound treatment of ELV’s and
that treatment facilities should have this information given to them from vehicle manufacturers. Thus, if remanufacturing is defined as a recovery process within the ELV directive and
is performed at treatment facilities, vehicles manufactureres may be obligated to supply key
information concerning dissassembly and reassamebly to support the remanufacturing operations conducted at the treatment facilities, information that vehicle manufacturers may be
reluctant to divulge.

Incorporation of remanufacturing into the ELV directive
Waste problem


Further, should the ELV directive somehow incorporate remanufacturing, a conflict in terms of
which life cycle stage remanufacturing occurs at would be developed within literature.
On first thought, the natural solution to this problem is to abridge the definition from the
automotive associations and define remanufacturing as being able to occur on both waste and
non-waste, a situation similar to Ijomah (2002), [21], in which the terminology of ‘used
products’ is used.
This decision would satisfy the situation of when IR conduct remanufacturing on cores
obtained from an ATF, thus allowing remanufacturing to emerge from behind reuse, recycle
and recovery terminology. Also, given that other types of remanufacturing, by for example
OEM remanufacturers, occur at the usage stage of the product life cycle, stipulating that
remanufacturing can occur on waste and non-waste within the ELV directive, would thus not
infringe on the remanufacturing definition as outlined by the automotive associations; in this
instance, the definition from the ELV would be in part agreement with the definition from the
automotive associations.
On closer examination however, stipulating that remanufacturing can occur on non-waste
may not actually be feasible given that waste permeates right through the ELV directive.
Specifically, given the focus of waste being diverted from landfill within the ELV directive,
any inclusion of a remanufacturing definition within the ELV directive must by definition force
remanufacturing to occur solely and strictly on waste products only. It can be stated therefore
that there is not a scenario at present which would allows a cross body agreement between
ELV directive and the automotive associations in terms of how remanufacturing is defined, or
more specically which stage in the life cycle remanufacturing occurs.
The authors put forward, that given remanufacturing is a viable option for restoring
products to as new standard, remanufacturing terminology should be adopted into the ELV
directive, therefore the non-waste requirement from the automotive associations must be
eliminated from a future definition. An example of such a definition is given below,
“Remanufacturing is a standardized industrial process by which cores are returned to
same-as-new, or better, condition and performance. The process is in line with specific
technical specifications, including engineering, quality and testing standards. The
process yields fully warranted products.” [3]
“A core is a previously used product or part, intended for the remanufacturing process.”
This would satisfy the ELV directives objectives and goals, and start the process of
remanufacturing emerging from behind other recovery strategies. The unavoidable drawback
is that two interpretations of when remanufacturing occurs in literature would be apparent;
confusion over remanfuactuing operations would be limited however given that
remanufacturing from the automotive associations perspective is conducted on prodcuts which
are not subject to the scope of the ELV directive.

Establishing remanufacturing as a standalone strategy
At this point, this work has shown how remanufacturing spans across recycling, reuse and

35

There are essentially two methods to achieve this, 1) to deconstruct and redefine the
existing definitions of recycling and reuse and remove any inference of remanufacturing
within these definitions, or 2) insert additional information as part of a remanufacturing
definition. Option 1, while the best option to maintain consistency with literature, is not
realistic as it would likely face much objection and resistance at the decision level, given that
both domestic laws and guidance of member states would likely have to be rewritten as a result
of this decision. Option 2 is therefore the more realistic option and the one put forward by the
authors. Along with the definition of remanufacturing presented, the authors suggest additional
text, similar to the following be inserted.
“If a core has been cleaned, disassembled, had it components restored, or replaced to
like new standard or better, reassembled, cleaned, meets or exceeds a rigorous testing
standard at least equivalent for a virgin core, and issued with a full warranty, the core is
said to have been remanufactured. Remanufacturing is a distinct process and is not
typically regarded a generic recycling or reuse operation”
In relation to remanufacturing being conducted at ATF’s. The potential of IR having a claim
on obtaining all information for environmentally sound treatment of ELV’s from vehicle
manufacturers, (including the information required to remanufacture) is not able to be resolved
in this work. Owing to member states have their own national legislations governing the
regulations expected from ATF’s and vehicle manufacturers, the current generic description of
practices with the EU directive is best left unchecked in this instance. However, this work does
highlight potential conflicts which could arise.

Conclusion
This research has identified that a recent coming together of leading automotive associations
has resulted in an agreed upon definition of remanufacturing, and that remanufacturing should
occur on products which in their view are not regarded as waste.
Taking this definition into consideration, by firstly ignoring the concept of waste, an
investigation of where remanufacturing currently resides in the ELV directive was performed.
It was shown that remanufacturing has a presence in recycling, reuse, recovery terminology,
with tenuous links between economic operators and treatment facilities. Justification of why
remanufacturing should emerge as a standalone strategy within the ELV directive was also
documented, with environmental benefits, consistency with literature, reduction in ambiguity
of definition and reduction in confusion over performance along with waste reduction benefits
discussed.
By incorporating waste into the argument, this research found that at present there is no
scenario which could satisfy both the automotive associations and the ELV directive, and so
direct incorporation of the automotive associations definition of remanufacturing was not
possible. The authors suggest remanufacturing is incorporated into the ELV directive via
removing the insistence on cores being non-waste, with an abridged version of the automotive
associations definition being presented. An unfortunate side effect is two differing interpretations within literature of which stage in the life cycle remanufacturing occurs is developed; this


process, as recorded via study of industry operations, is given for incorporation into the ELV
directive. This inclusion of a remanufacturing process should go some way to starting the
process of establishing remanufacturing as a distinct recovery strategy within the ELV
directive.
