

Introduction
The electronics industry is the fastest growing industry in the world. The demand for electronics
products particularly consumer electronics is increasing rapidly due to computerization and
mobile phone technology innovations worldwide. The Indian electronics industry is also
growing with the worldwide growth and the electronics industry is among one of the fastest
growing industries in the country. According to the annual report of the ministry of information
technology, India, the market for the electronics industry is expected to be $400b by the year
2020. At present, the contribution of domestic production is approximate $31b and is expected
to be $100b by the year 2020. Digital India, e-governance and other initiatives by the
government of India offers a lot of future potential for growth of electronics industry in India.
“Make in India” initiative by the government of India has turned the attention of global
Organizations towards India and they are looking for building up manufacturing facilities in
India to serve the domestic as well as global markets. Product life cycles are becoming shorter
and shorter with the advent of new technologies and consumers quest for new products. The
products are being discarded very fast by the consumers which result in electronics-waste,
popularly known as e-waste. According to United Nations report (Global E-Waste Monitor
[11]), India is the 5th biggest producer of e-waste in the world generating 1.7 million tons’ ewaste in 2014 and its volume is expected to grow by 21% in next 3 years. One of the ways to
manage this e-waste efficiently is the adaptation of reverse supply chain practices by the
industry. The reverse supply chain may help in extending the products useful life cycle through
reuse, repairing, remanufacturing, and minimizing the e-waste through recycling of discarded
products. The reverse supply chain also plays an important role in managing the product returns
because of the increased flow of product returns due to the liberalized return policy and
allowances offered by the Organizations to the consumers. Prakash and Barua [25] identified
barriers to the reverse logistics implementation in Indian electronics industry and suggested
solutions to overcome these barriers. Heggde and Kumar [14] explored the strategies for
collaboration among telecom Organizations in India. Agrawal et al. [1] developed a forecasting
model for product returns in Indian mobile manufacturing Organization. In another study, the
opportunities and challenges for mobile business activities were discussed through the case
study of Indian Organizations [6]. Noman and Amin [22] studies the reverse logistics framework of cellphones exploring the practices and policies in Canada. In a study in Germany, Gurita
et al. [12] examined the potential of reuse, remanufacturing, and recycling of mobile phones.
Vogtlander et al. [39] analyzed the circular business models for consumer electronics products
including mobile phones. Rathore et al. [26] proposed a framework for achieving sustainability
through remanufacturing and illustrated the case of an Indian mobile manufacturing Organization. Authors have reviewed the waste management and recycling status of mobile phones and
also explored the waste management of Indian mobile industry [30, 33, 34, 38]. The Organizations can manage product returns and end of life products through effective implementation of
the reverse logistics system. Many Organizations are reluctant to the adoption of reverse
logistics system because of several issues faced by the Organizations. It is evident from the
previous research that issues like implementation of reverse logistics, prediction of reverse flow
of products, outsourcing decisions, disposition decisions, performance measurement system for
reverse logistics and so on have not explored much in the past [2, 3]. The proposed study aims at

117

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The second section discussed about the
literature review related to reverse supply chain and various issues in reverse supply chain. The
case method is explained step by step in the third section. The fourth section consists of details
of the case study including organization profile, reverse supply chain process of the organization, SOWT analysis, and various issues in the organization. Last section, the fourth section
concludes the findings of the case study.

Literature review
Reverse supply chain has gained importance since last decade because of legislation, environmental concerns, and corporate social responsibility. It has been found to be beneficial to
various organizations in terms of the improvement in the profits. Some of the organizations
like HP, Dell have implemented it for competitive advantage. Jayaraman and Luo [16]
mentioned that Kodak has successfully implemented recycling facilities and is able to reuse
up to 86% of a camera’s parts. Similarly, other leading manufacturers such as Canon and
Xerox have also attained remanufacturing rates of nearly 90 %. Recently, Paterson et al. [24]
worked on incorporating remanufacturing into end-of-life vehicles in Europe. In India, the
experience of the reverse supply chain is relatively new and there is lack of interest in the
adaptation of reverse supply chain practices. This may be because of the absence of strong
legislation or may be because of the lack of interest of top management and business partners
to spend money for reverse supply chain system [27]. There is the number of factors affecting
reverse supply chain practices and presence or absence of these factors can become drivers or
barriers to reverse supply chain implementation in an industry [29]. Dowlatshahi [9] enumerated strategic factors such as government rules and regulations, environmental issues, consumer concerns, and costs; along with operational factors such as cost-benefit analysis,
logistics, warehousing, supply chain management, recycling, and packaging. In a survey of
consumer electronics, Janes et al. [15] identified main enablers of reverse logistics as top
management awareness, strategic alliances with associates, understanding of cost and performance, recapturing value from used products, and ability to send products back into the
market. Jindal and Sangwan [17] investigated economic factors, environmental issues, and
social drivers for the Indian industry. Agrawal et al. [4] identified major critical success factors
for Indian electronics industry as top management awareness, resource management, economic
factors, and contracts terms & conditions. These factors help the Organizations to take
appropriate action for adaptation and implementation of the reverse logistics system.
Another important issue is the outsourcing of reverse logistics activities. Manufacturers
adopting reverse logistics, have to decide whether outsourcing those activities to the third party
or performing themselves [21]. Outsourcing may reduce the cost because of economies of scale
and also, manufacturers can reduce their asset base, and deploy the capital released for other
productive usages by outsourcing reverse logistics. Other advantages include less uncertainty in
operations, more concentration on core competency, more flexible, improved consumer receptiveness, and improved access to new technology [18, 19]. Product flows in reverse logistics are
uncertain in terms of quantity, quality, and timing of returns. Forecasting product returns are



Once the products are collected, inspected, and sorted into different categories, they are
disposition either for reuse, or repairing, or remanufacturing, or recycling depending on the
number of factors. Disposition of returned products may be industry or product specific and
depends upon the number of factors including price/value / shelf life of the product, transportation cost, and the demand outlook [35]. The consumer expects the credit or replacement of
returned product as quickly as possible while the manufacturer wants to disposition these
products for recapturing the maximum value [13]. Strategic disposition of the returned product
is important for the better performance of reverse logistics system of an organization [7].
Another key issue is the performance measurement system of the reverse supply chain.
According to Song and Hong [36], ‘the performance measurement systems can provide
organizations with relevant, appropriate, complete, and accurate information. The organizations have opportunities to monitor, and reposition their management and operations to obtain
highly competitive environment’. Ravi et al. [28] used balanced card approach and analytic
network process technique for the selection of alternatives for the end of life computers. Shaik
and Kader [32] developed a reverse logistics performance evaluation framework by using
balanced scorecard approach and analytic hierarchy process. Paksoy et al. [23] developed a
mathematical model for investigating a number of operational and environmental performance
measures consisting of total transportation costs, total environmental costs, emission rates,
consumer demand. Bai and Sarkis [8] introduced a performance evaluation framework by
using AHP for evaluating the economic, environmental, and the operational performance.
Agrawal et al. [4] developed fuzzy AHP approach for economic, environmental, and social
performance measurement of reverse logistics.

Case method
The reverse supply chain has become essential for the organizations because of the increased
flow of products return, growing concerns for the environment, and corporate social responsibility. The Organizations are adopting the practices of the reverse supply chain in order to
comply with government rules and regulations and to remain competitive while using green as
a marketing tool. These Organizations come across several issues while performing reverse
logistics activities. Case research is one of the effective tools for in-depth understanding and
analysis of these issues. According to [42] “A case study is an empirical inquiry that (i)
Investigates a contemporary phenomenon within its real-life context, especially when, and (ii)
The boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clearly evident”.
Case studies are used as a research method if contextual factors are taken into account
but at the same time limit the extent of the analysis [10, 40]. Applying a flexible,
sometimes even opportunistic research strategy is one of its major strengths, but might
also be a major weakness of case study research, in particular, if the process is not well
documented. A single case has been considered as a representative case of a wider group
of cases for the proposed study. The research methodology adopted for the study is based
on literature review and discussion with executives of the Organization. The literature
review enabled the identification of various reverse supply issues [5]. Discussions with
executives provided a real-life scenario of the reverse supply chain in Indian electronics

119

Step 1: Definition of research question
The first step of case research methodology involves defining the research question. The
research question is defined as “Study of select issues in reverse supply chain of Indian
electronics industry”. The case study will seek the answer to the following questions in context
to a case from an electronics organization i.e. ABC Limited.

&
&
&
&
&
&
&

What are the major reverse supply chain activities performed by the Organization?
What are the critical success factors for reverse supply chain implementation?
What are the major reverse supply chain activities outsourced by the Organization?
How are the decisions for outsourcing taken?
How is the future planning for reverse supply chain done in the Organization?
How are the returned products disposition for further processing?
How the Organization measures the performance of the reverse supply chain?

Step 2: Instrument Development
The second step of case research methodology is the development of a research instrument and
selection of the field site. A single case with embedded issues has been considered as a
representative case of a wider group of cases for the proposed study. The Organization for the
study has been selected based on its size in terms of revenue and its office in NCR Delhi, India
which is local for the researchers.
Step 3: Data Collection
The next step is data collection for the case study. The data may be collected through open
interview, semi-structured interview, structured interview, questionnaire, documents/websites/
publications, direct observation, participant observations [31]. The data for the proposed case
study was collected both from primary and secondary sources through the web page and
published material, and questionnaire followed by the semi-structured interviews with concerned people in the Organization. Total eleven number of people from various levels
participated in the study and they were interviewed during the visit.
Step 4: Data Analysis
Information and data collected from the field visits to the Organization and other secondary
sources were used to analyze the issues in reverse supply chain.
Step 5: Dissemination
Case-based approaches to research are often subject to criticism, some valid, some invalid. Yin
[42] made an effort by providing logical validity tests for judging the reliability and validity of
the case research. Data for the proposed study were also collected from the other sources like
regulatory documents, web pages of the Organization to ensure the construct validity and



Case study
A case of Indian electronics organization, ABC Limited was considered for the proposed
study. The case study of the organization is explained in the following section.

Profile of the organization, ABC Limited
ABC Limited is one of the growing consumer’s electronics organization having a corporate
office in Gurgaon, near Delhi, India. The Organization has approximately 1000 employees and
reported approximately 2.0 billion USD annual revenue in the financial year (2015–16). The
revenue of this organization in last four financial years is shown in Fig. 1. It is evident from the
figure that this organization is growing very fast in the Indian mobile manufacturing market.
The Organization offers a range of products including mobile phones, PC tablets, LED TV
and data cards. The major business comes from the sale of mobile phones. The Organization is
the largest domestic mobile phone Organization in low-cost market segmentation. The Organization is currently the 2nd largest mobile phone Organization in India having 16% market
share in smartphone market and 13% market share in the overall mobile phone segment. The
Organization is 2nd largest in Indian tablet PC segment also with 11% market share. The
Organization initially started its business with mobile phones model based sourcing from the
Organizations in Korea, China, and Taiwan to take full advantage of zero import duty on
mobile phones. Later on Organization set up a manufacturing plant in Rudraprayag,
Uttrakhand, India where it manufactures PC tablets and LED TV. Recently, the Organization
has started manufacturing mobile phone devices at this plant. The Organization procures some
of the components and parts from China and Taiwan and assembles them at this facility. The
Organization has widespread supply chain network in India particularly in rural areas and sells
approximately 2.3 million handsets every month. Recently, the Organization has started selling
mobile phones in Russia also. Recently, Ministry of the environment, forest, & climate change;
Government of India has notified the drafts of waste management rules 2016 (Amended in
2018) which includes e-waste management. These rules are based on the concept of extended
producer responsibility. Also, online sale through e-retailers like Amazon India, snap deal, flip
kart has increased considerably in last few years. The product returns have also increased due
to the liberal return policies offered by these Organizations. The Organization is looking for
long-term solutions for handling these returns along with the end of life products.

Fig. 1 Revenue of the ABC
Limited in last four financial years

Annual Revenue (USD Billion) of the ABC Limited in
last three financial years
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2012-13

2013-14


121

Reverse supply chain of the ABC Limited
ABC Limited has vast network of super-distributors, distributors, and retailers throughout the
country in 560 towns in India. As shown in Fig. 2, it has 70 super-distributors, also known as
super-stockist, more than 1500 distributors, and 125,000 retailers along with more than 500
customer service centers across the country. The Organization has given a lot of attention to the
supply chain and has developed innovative way of supply chain distribution. It introduced cashonly model unlike other Organizations offering 60 days credit line to the distributors. They
offered higher margin (Approx. 15%, higher than the industry average of 6%) to the distributors in
lieu of cash payment to the ABC Limited before delivery of products. Its strategy is to offer more
margin and no credit to the distributors with advance payment to the Organization. There are of
the view that “If the distributor does not buy your handsets, there is no pressure on him to sell
them,” and at the same time it will offer more profit to the distributors. This strategy worked well
for them. They not only managed to increase its sales but also managed cash flow very efficiently.
The Organization tracked the sales of products on daily basis to monitor the success of the cashonly model. The products are supplied to the distributors on regular basis so that they do not
locked in money in excess inventory. The products are sold through the online retailers and also
by its retailers (Called merchants). The products returns have increased considerably due to online
selling and their liberal policies like cash on delivery, 30 days replacement warranty, 1 year
warranty etc. on products. The product returns comprised of new products, products for repair,
non-repairable products, and end of life products. The product acquisition from consumers is
carried out through retailers or service centers or products are collected by the third party and
dispatched to the service centers. New products, returned are resold by retailer after repackaging
by the service center, if required. Repair work is also performed at the service center and products
after repair are given back to the consumers through respective retailers. The LED TV, and PC
tablets, which are non-repairable are returned to the manufacturing facility. The refurbishment or
Consumers
Return Products

Service Centers
(522)

Return to the
respecƟve
facility

Yes

No

Repaired,
Serviced

Is it
packaged?
Yes

No

Reuse as it is

Suppliers (China,
Korea, India)

Store for
recycling/
dispoasal

Manufacturing Plant

No

Remanufact.

Super-Stokist(75)

Yes

Distributers(1500)

Resale it

Retailers/Online
Retailers (125,000)

Forward
Logistics
Reverse
Logistics

Collection by Third
Party

Collection by Third
Party
Third Party Recycler

Fig. 2 Reverse supply chain of the ABC Limited

End Of Life
Products with



remanufacturing of these products is carried out at the manufacturing facility and products are
resold through secondary markets. However, mobile phones are repaired or refurbished at the
service center only. No remanufacturing of these products is considered because of higher
logistics cost and non-availability of established remanufacturing. ABC Limited has authorized
the third party recycler for collecting and recycling of the end of life mobile phones from the
consumers, service centers, and also from the manufacturing facility. Although this is not
outsourced where the Organization may have better control of the recycling operations. The
Organization has not given much attention to the reverse activities of the supply chain. Pursuant to
e-waste management rules-2016 (amended in 2018) in India, increased flow of product returns,
and recently established manufacturing facility, the Organization has decided to explore the
various recycling, remanufacturing options. Reverse supply chain of the ABC Limited is shown
in Fig. 2 and processes are explained in the following sub-sections.

Product acquisition/gate keeping
The products are sold through retailers, e-retailers, and through own online portal of the ABC
limited. The acquisition of returned products, sold online takes place at the site of the consumer
by the e-retailers through an outsourced service provider. The products (sold through retailers)
are returned by the consumer either at the store or at the consumer service center.

Collection
The returned products are collected by the e-retailers and sent it back to the point from where
they were purchased during the monthly return policy. These products are mostly new and
returned by the consumers due to price or change of mind for the products. After this onemonth time, products are returned by the consumers to the service centers if they have an issue
with the functioning of products. The product acquisition takes place at the service center. In
case of sell through the retailers, the products are returned to the retailers during the one-month
period. Otherwise, consumers return those products to the service center.

Inspection and sorting
The products returned during the 1 month are mostly new and need little or no inspection. The
products at the service centers are inspected by the engineers. The products are repaired and
returned to the consumer. In case of LED TV, the products are inspected at the site of consumer
and shipped to the service center if not repaired at the site. If the products are not repaired at the
service center, the products are transported to the manufacturing facility of the ABC Limited. If
products are dead and there is no scope of any remanufacturing or further improvements, they
are collected by the third party for the recycling.

Disposition
In recent years, the online sale of products through e-retailers and Organization’s own portal has
increased considerably. At the same time, the Organizations are experiencing the returns even up

123

place at the consumer service centers, and products are returned to the consumers. In case of LED
TV, the repairing may be carried out at the consumer site or shipped to the service center. If
products cannot be repaired at the service center, they are shipped to the manufacturing facility.
ABC Limited performs the Refurbishing or remanufacturing operations at the manufacturing facility. The LED TV is refurbished or remanufactured completely and after
remanufacturing, they are either returned to the consumer or they are sold in the secondary
market through the online website like greendust.com and other local dealers. The mobiles are
only refurbished and resold or returned to the consumer. ABC Limited has only assembly
facility for mobiles and remanufacturing is not the viable option. It has recently started
manufacturing of mobiles in India and planning to go for 100% manufacturing of mobiles in
India through local sourcing of components and parts. In case the products are not refurbished
or remanufactured, they are the disposition for recycling. ABC Limited has authorized a thirdparty recycler to collect its product from consumer, service center and from the manufacturing
facility, and recycle them. Although this authentication is formal in nature and ABC Limited
may need to look into this pursuant to upcoming e-waste management rules and regulations in
India. The products are collected by the recycler and thereafter Organization has no audit of
these types of products. Disposal of products is carried out by the recycler Organization.

Redistribution
Products after refurbishment/remanufacturing are sold in the secondary market through online
web portals and through local dealers. The new products returned by the consumers at service
centers are resold in the market after repackaging if required.

SWOT analysis of the ABC Limited
Any organization needs to analyze its Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats
(SWOT) for strategy formation to sustain and compete in the market. Therefore, SWOT
analysis of the ABC Limited was carried to get in-depth insight of the business model of
the organization. SWOT findings are summarized in the Table 1. Low-cost products, Innovative products entering the market at right time are the major strengths of the ABC Limited. The
Organization has the strong widespread network across the country has deep penetration into
the rural market segment of the country. ABC Limited has developed its own manufacturing
facility in India. The Organization has bundled its products with some of the key telecom
service providers and has better coordination with service providers. Consumer service centers
with skilled capacities help in performing repairing work efficiently and reduce the
remanufacturing need of the products. However, the low-cost brand image of the ABC Limited
makes it less competitive in the urban markets. This organization takes the advantages of
global research of other organizations for introducing the new products in the market. This
may prove to be disadvantageous in future because of entry of many Chinese organizations
with similar low-cost products. The profit margins on the products are reducing due to
competition, online retailing and higher margins to the distributors. The rapid change in
technology is also a big challenge for the Organization. For example, Demand for a 4G phone
is growing very fast and 35% smartphone sold in India are 4G. According to International Data



Table 1 SWOT analysis of ABC Limited
Strengths
Innovative Products and Features
Low-cost products
Introducing new product at right
time in the market
Strong supply chain of distribution
Strong supply network in rural markets
Effective cash flow management
Co-Ordination with telecom service providers
State of art manufacturing facility
Repairing facilities at
Consumer Service centers
Opportunities
Huge demand for mobile phones
Penetration in urban market
Profits from precious metal extracted through
recycling
Exports to international markets
New Market Segment for
remanufactured products
Green Products can improve brand image and
can be a competitive image
Digital India Initiative
Make in India Initiative

Weaknesses
Low-cost brand image in urban markets
Image of low-quality Chinese products
New products similar to products available
in global market
Reduced profit margins due to low price and higher
margins to distributors
No control over recycling and disposal of EOL products
Limited remanufacturing facility
Products are not designed for easy to disassemble
Do not have robust reverse supply chain
No, Take back type initiative for promoting sustainability
Threats
Growing competition in domestic and International market
Replication of business model by other Organizations
Strict e-waste management rules and regulations-2016,
further amended in 2018
Entry of Chinese Organizations through online retailers
If Organization cannot take responsibility for e-waste
management adequately, it may be forced to go out of
business in future
Price reduction due to online business offerings
Reach of e-retailers to rural markets
Establishment of other mobile manufacturing
facilities in India

recycles the products. There is an opportunity to extract precious metals from the recycling of
products. This organization has not given much attention to reverse supply chain and sustainability which may become a threat in future with strict rules and regulations by the government
of India. There is opportunity of new emerging market for remanufactured products and also,
better brand image by taking green initiative which may be a competitive advantage to the
Organization. Digital India, and Make in India initiative provide an opportunity for future
market potential and other benefits offered by the government for extension of manufacturing
in India.

Key strategic issues and challenges: findings and discussion
After studying and going through the profile of ABC Ltd. and business practices of its reverse
supply chain, the case was analyzed based on case methodology to illustrate the various
reverse supply chain issues in the Organization. Different strategic issues were identified and
are explained as follows.

Returned products acquisition and collection issues
ABC Limited sells products to the consumers through multiple channels of distribution. As
discussed above, the product acquisition takes places at multiple points in the channel. The

125

products. In future, there may be problems of compliance with the e-waste management
regulations. There is a lot of uncertainty in terms of quality, quantity, and timing of product
returns particularly the end of life products. These uncertainties may result in inefficiency in
planning and control of reverse supply chain [20]. The short-term forecasting is managed by
the organization through tracking of sales from the distributors. The Organization has
authorized the third party for the end of life products from consumers directly but there is
no audit of the recycling of these products. This is more a formal type arrangement for
providing business to the recycler and cannot be considered as equivalent to outsourcing
where the Organization has better control and shares the business. Long-term forecasting is
important for the strategic decisions related to setting up of own facilities for recycling or
outsourcing these activities. The future predictions may help in future economic benefits of
owning reverse logistics by the Organization.

Disposition related issues
Inspection and sorting are carried out at the service centers of the organization. These centers
are equipped with modern facilities and trained engineers providing best service to the
customers. In case of LED TV and tablets, the products after inspection are the disposition
for recycling or remanufacturing depending on their quality if they cannot be repaired. Mobile
phones are repaired and returned to the customers. In most of the cases, the PCB is replaced
with the new one if it cannot be repaired. However, it was noticed that charges for the repairing
phones, not covered under warranty or after warranty period are very high and consumers
mostly prefer to get repair them in the local market. The organization may provide better
service to the consumers by resolving this issue. The organization is used to disposition the
mobile for recycling if they cannot be repaired. The reason was that the mobiles were sourced
from the foreign country and they had no remanufacturing facilities in India. Since low cost is
the key for this organization, it perceived no potential to disposition them for remanufacturing.
ABC Limited has established the manufacturing facilities within the country and also, the
remanufacturing is recently being offered by some of the third-party service providers. The
Organization is considering the remanufacturing operations of the mobile phones.

Critical success factors for reverse supply chain implementation
ABC Limited has established a vast chain of the network for the forward logistics and also
committed to managing reverse supply chain to provide better service to the consumer.
However, it is under pressure to manage the e-waste generated because of government rules
and regulations. Since this organization has started manufacturing in India, it is looking for
economic benefits by incorporating reverse supply chain practices into their business. In order
to implement reverse supply chain practices, it is important to understand the critical success
factors for the ABC Limited. After discussion with the management of the organization, it was
observed that top management awareness is most important for complying with regulatory
requirements and at the same time to invest money in the required resources. Another
important factor observed was resource management including human resource, development
of the remanufacturing facility, and establishing recycling facility. The economic factor is also



chain practices. In order to comply with the government regulations and to achieve sustainable
developments, it is important to have contract terms and conditions incorporating the government regulations regarding components/parts supplied by them. Management information
system is already in place in this organization and they are able to track their sales and stock
status very well. Although information system does not track the end of life products. Since
products are sold and distribution through multiple channels, the integration of forward and
reverse supply chain is not easy and economical for the organization. The joint consortium is
important vertically but not significant horizontally because of competition in the market.
Process capability will be important when the organization will start full-fledged manufacturing in-house. The legislation, taxes, and environmental concerns are the part of a discussion in
this organization and will gain importance with the effective implementation by the concerned
regulatory bodies. In summary, the major top four critical success factors for the ABC Ltd.
have been identified as top management awareness, resource management, economic factors,
and contract terms and conditions. Agrawal et al. [3] also identified the critical success factors
for the Indian electronics industry as shown in Fig. 3. Observations made by Agrawal et al. [3]
further validates the findings of this study.

Outsourcing decisions
Outsourcing is one of the important decisions in reverse supply chain [4]. ABC Limited has a
vast distribution network for the forward supply chain. The reverse supply chain is mainly
confined to the warranty period returns and new products return through online retailers. It has
established the consumer service centers and logistics facilities for collection, reuse, and repair.
However, remanufacturing is not explored due to model-based sourcing from the foreign
countries like Korea, China, and Taiwan. Since now the manufacturing facilities have been
established in India, ABC Limited can explore the option of remanufacturing. Also, third-party
service providers are offering the remanufacturing of mobile phones. The organization can
outsource the remanufacturing to these third-party service providers. The organization has
authorized the third-party recycler for the collection and recycling of end of life products
because it wants to focus on core activities. This organization is of the view that the third-party
service providers have specialized infrastructure, IT capabilities, and logistics facilities which
may be more beneficial for the Organization. Pursuant to the recent e-waste management rules
and pressure from stakeholders, the organization needs to explore the option of recycling as per
regulatory requirements.
Management
information
system

Resource
management

Top management
awareness

Environmental
concerns

Economic factors

Legislation

Critical Success
Factors

Consumer
awareness and
social
acceptability

Process
capabilities and
skilled workers

Joint Consortium

Fig. 3 Critical success factors for the ABC Limited

Integration of
forward and
reverse supply
chain

Direct and Indirect
taxes

127

Performance measurement system
ABC Limited has no established performance measurement system for the reverse supply
chain. The key performance measures include the number of products returned, reasons for
product returns, quality of product returns, and cost of product returns. The performance
measures are mainly focused on the economic performance, internal process capabilities,
learning, and growth. This organization has not given much attention to the environmental
and social factors. Agrawal et al. [5] have observed that for sustainable performance improvement and effective reverse supply chains, environmental and social factors should be part of
the performance framework. Now ABC Ltd. sees the opportunity of utilizing corporate social
responsibility funds for the management of reverse supply chain operations. The inclusion of
some of the environmental and social factors and their measurements may provide an
opportunity to spend money on them for the improvements.

Conclusion
In last few years, the reverse supply chain has gained a lot of attention due to environmental
concerns, government regulations, and corporate social responsibility. It has also become
important in the emerging economies like India because of huge product returns in online
retailing business. Several strategic issues and challenges have been explored by the researchers in the past. Although, there are many studies on reverse supply chains they have
not explored strategic issues and challenges in context to developing countries such as India or
other South Asian countries. The present case study has provided an in-depth understanding of
key strategic issues and challenges in the electronics industry by using a framework consisting
of theoretical and real-life practical approach. The strategic issues which were found to be
crucial in reserve supply chain are critical success factors, outsourcing decisions, disposition
decisions, forecasting product returns, and performance evaluation system. Some of the major
findings are summarized as follows.
(i) The electronics industry is coming across a new challenge of managing product returns
because of the changed business environment, and complying e-waste management rules
and regulations.
(ii) Top management awareness, Resource management, Economic factors, and Contracts
terms & conditions with the supplier are the critical success factors for the industry.
(iii) The Organization has authorized third party recycler for collection and recycling of end
of products. They need to differentiate between outsourcing, and authorizing the third
party for recycling. The organization has no control over the third party to whom they
have authorized for the collection and recycling of end of life products. Pursuant to new
e-waste management rules and regulations by the government of India, the audit of the
e-waste is not easy with this type of arrangement.
(iv) This organization is able to manage inventory through tracking of products with the
distributors online. However, long-term forecasting product returns are important for the
future planning and decision-making in the reverse supply chain activities.



remanufacturing has not been explored much. The initiative like Make in India may
encourage the remanufacturing option while establishing new manufacturing facilities in
the country.
(vi) Another key observation is that the Organization has not set up any formal evaluation of
performance in reference to reverse supply chain activities. It may be important in the
long run to establish comprehensive performance measurement system for reverse
supply chain so that it could be monitored and improved.
These observations and findings may help other organizations to improve their reverse supply
chain activities. These observations and findings may also be useful for decision-making.
Despite providing in-depth analysis, the study is not without limitations. While study covered
key strategic issues, the study does not consider all parts of the reverse supply chain due to lack
of accessibility of all information. Furthermore, interviews may be biased and may not
represent the realistic picture. The Organization may not be comfortable in talking about
various issues openly because of regulatory requirements, and legal bindings. Therefore, to
generalize the findings, more case studies and empirical study may be carried out as the future
scope of the study.

22(2):195–219
