Institute for Sustainable Development etc). Thus, the sustainable development is oriented to
an economic and social progress, without affecting the natural equilibrium.
At the first glance, marketing and sustainable development seem to be contradictory terms.
Marketing is focused on satisfaction of customers’ needs, being considered by many people
a mechanism to stimulate consumption. Sustainable development militates for consumption
limitation, as not to compromise the quality of life for future generations. Sustainable
marketing is a new vision, oriented on an effective use of resources aimed to offer the best
value to customers and to other stakeholders, by taking into consideration society’s and
environment’s long term interests. This concept is beginning to be approached in academic
area (Charter et al., 2006, Louppe, 2006, Chahal and Sharma, 2006), being assimilated, in
certain situations, by the business environment. To carry on this orientation, it is necessary
to design a marketing mix with specific characteristics.
Price has an important role in offering a sustainable development, because it has to assure
in a transaction a fair report between the customer’s sacrifice and the value offered by the
seller. In commercial area, price fairness perceptions have a major contribution in satisfying
customers’ needs or in sustaining firm’s reputation.
For the present paper, we have defined price fairness concept and its dimensions, as they
are presented in the literature (Xia et al, 2004, Cox, 2001, Goodwin and Ross, 1992, Diller,
2008, van den Bos et al, 1998, Campbell, 1999, Vrânceanu, 2007). One of the most
controversial pricing tactics, concerning its fairness, is represented by differential prices,
used frequently in commercial area (Haws and Bearden, 2006, Kannan and Kopalle, 2001,
Gabarino and Lee 2003, Grewal et al, 2004). In three marketing experiments we have
assessed fairness perception of three types of differential prices, its influence on perceived
value and on buying intentions. The results might render evident important managerial
directions to commercial firms towards a sustainable development.
1. Sustainable development concept
In defining the meaning of sustainable development, Fergus and Rowney (2005) concluded
that the early use of the term “had the potential to stimulate discursive engagement with
respect to the future development of the human species within an ethical framework based
around the values of inclusivity, diversity, and integration” (p. 25).
The World Business Council for Sustainable Development defines this concept as „ forms
of progress that meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs “(W.B.C.S.D.). The same organization states that the aim of
this orientation is to help companies to prosper and to have long term potential to innovate
and grow. For a company, value creation in the present has to be correlated with assuring
the possibility to develop its businesses in the future. Thus, taking into account the limited
resources, it has to manage the producing and commercial processes as to harmonize its
financial interests with those of consumers and of society (Popescu et al, 2008).
The main concepts sustainable development is based on are: capital stock, equity, eco-form,
integrative management (Jabareen, 2008). For sustainable development it is necessary to
preserve natural capital stock, composed by renewable and non-renewable natural
resources. The mission of the organizations is to keep constant this capital, not to endanger
the equity: economic, social, environmental or political. A definition that has put in value
the equity principles belongs to World Commission on Environment and Development
(WCED, 1987) “Sustainable development requires meeting the basic needs of all and
extending to all the opportunity to satisfy their aspirations for a better life”. The most
appealed is intergenerational equity that states equal rights to the present and future
generations, concerning the resource distribution. Intragenerational equity consists of
eliminating discrimination and stimulating a more equitable distribution of power among
the members of the current generation.
Eco-form represents the way to organize the human habitat (buildings, residential spaces,
houses), to assure an ecological design and to manage consumption. In this direction,
building and other activities in the residential spaces should not affect the environment on
the long term. Integrative management states the principles of acquiring equilibrium
between economic, social and ecologic objectives. According to this vision, environmental
protection is a necessary condition to acquire economic growth and social development.
2. Sustainable marketing – a new approach for the company
Marketing orientation has been changing in the last decades, becoming more adapted to the
new economic and social requirements. In these conditions there have been introduced
some new concepts as: societal marketing, green marketing or sustainable marketing.
Societal marketing is an orientation directed to satisfaction of customers’ needs, without
affecting the general interests of the society. American Marketing Association uses for
societal marketing also the term social responsibility of marketing as “the obligation of
marketing organizations to do no harm to the social environment and, wherever possible, to
use their skills and resources to enhance that environment”. The same association defines
green marketing as “the efforts by organizations to produce, promote, package, and reclaim
products in a manner that is sensitive or responsive to ecological concerns”.
Charter et al (2006) consider sustainable marketing as “a broader management concept
which focuses on achieving the ‘triple bottom line’ through creating, producing and
delivering sustainable solutions with higher net sustainable value whilst continuously
satisfying customers and other stakeholders” (p. 12).
The drivers for a company to adopt a sustainable marketing orientation are:
•

increasing of legislation norms number related to pollution and environment
protection;

•

the limited character of natural resources and their increasing cost;

•

changes in consumers’ attitudes and behaviors, so they have become more
sensitive to sustainable solutions;

•

increasing of stakeholders’ awareness toward the necessity of more socially
responsible actions;

•

the necessity to gain a competitive advantage by adopting sustainable strategies.

responsibility (CSR). This orientation states that a company obtains business success by
incorporating ethical principles in its actions, by being sensitive to social and environmental
problems, attitude that confers it an important competitive advantage. Chahal and Sharma
(2006) define CSR as “firm’s obligation to protect and improve welfare of the society and
its organization, now as well as in future, through its various business and social actions,
and ensures that it generates equitable and sustainable benefits for the various stakeholders”
(p. 205).
The increasing preoccupation of firms for sustainable marketing is shown in a survey made
in 2009 on 270 companies from United States, by American Marketing Association and
Fleishman-Hillard, Inc. (A. M. A. and Fleishman-Hillard, Inc., 2009). According to the
results, in the next 12 months, 43% companies anticipate an increase in sustainability
practices in their marketing activities. The political, economic and social environment will
determine 58% companies to place more emphasis on sustainability issues in the next two
to three years, than in the past. An important percent of companies (58%) perceive
sustainability’s aim as to assure equilibrium between financial, human and natural
resources for a long term benefit. Surpassing the environment protection objective has been
mentioned by only 23% of respondents.
For the purpose of making applicable the sustainable marketing orientation, it is necessary
to design a marketing mix with some particularities that differentiate it by the traditional
vision. In the product policy, all activities, from ideas generation to the new product launch
have to be submitted to sustainable vision, that emphasis offering satisfaction to all
stakeholders and not to affect their long-term interests. In this context, the new product is
important to be evaluated according to some requirements: fulfillment of customers’ real
needs, level of energy and other resource consumption, possibility to make it by renewable
resources and to recycle them, impact on human health, pollution level, easiness in
repairing it, not to use children in manufacturing it and not to test it on animals.
Package, as a corporate component of product, must be: biodegradable, safe, functional,
recyclable, and easy to transport or deposit (Filip et al, 2009). Another important
component of the product is its image. In sustainable marketing, the company has to build a
good reputation among the stakeholders, able to reflect its concerns on social responsibility
and on fairness towards all partners.
In price policy, sustainable development has to focus on setting a fair price. This goes
beyond the equilibrium price (resulted by intersection between supply and demand curves)
aiming to serve the interests of both parties in the transaction, by assuring an equitable
distribution between them (Louppe, 2006). A fair price generates an ethic behavior that
implies not to speculate a power position, an offer scarcity, a low information degree or
other situations that may affect the interests of all stakeholders. For example, due to
customers’ power superiority it is possible to be imposed a certain price, that does not
reflect the value offered. In this case, some suppliers might be driven out of business and
thus the sustained development might be affected, because the principles of justice have not
been respected. In pricing literature, there has been developed the concept of good value for
money that means a fair quality-price ratio. This involves setting profit margins according
to the real product value.

protection taxes, offering deals for social responsible behaviors and collecting funds for
ecological causes. It also might be a leverage in “demarketing” strategies, used to reduce
consumption of energy, of non-renewable resources or of products that might affect the
environment. In sustainable marketing, in order to justify the price to be paid, it is essential
to communicate the value offered by environment improvement. Price is also an instrument
to sustain social causes, because people are less sensitive to price when the product is
aimed to contribute to charitable actions.
In promotional strategy, the message has to be clear, correct, not to use misleading
information, to focus the company preoccupation for environment protection and to other
social causes. The communication target has to comprise not only the customers, but also
other stakeholders’ categories as: suppliers, shareholders, mass-media, environmentalists,
employees, competitors, chains, government agencies, general public (Filip et al, 2008).
The product attributes communicated in promotional messages have to be checked in real
life by people belonging to targeted categories. The promotional campaigns have to be
based on marketing research information that makes evident customers’ needs, perceptions
and expectations related to the company and to its products. Through its messages a
company can stimulate its consumers to become more aware about social and
environmental exigencies and to act consequently.
In sustainable marketing, distribution has to focus on a fair trade orientation. This means
that the commercial transaction has to be based on transparency, equity and respect for all
the parties. For a sustainable development, between the members of the supply chain has to
be a strong partnership aimed to generate a coherent vision and mutual benefits.
Carter and Rogers (2008), in presenting sustainable supply chains, point out that when a
firm is dependent on external resources it may improve long term economic development
by vertical coordination of supply chain activities. In this direction, it might be constituted
partnerships and alliances with certain suppliers that stimulate safe products offering,
concerning environment or customers’ health. One example in this respect is represented by
Starbucks cafés that used this type of partnership to offer high quality coffee, assuring a fair
price to the farmers that grow coffee plants in ecologic conditions. A sustainable vision on
supply chains has also implications on costs, leading to their reduction by a better
management of product packaging, transport and storage, by creating better work
conditions for employees.
Marketing has a significant contribution to sustainable development because it is aimed to
increase value offered to customers, taking into account limited resources. The products
designed in a sustainable vision include some supplementary costs oriented on environment
protection, which might conduct to increasing of selling prices, although on long term, the
supported cost (individual and social) is reduced. Thus, taking into consideration Romanian
customers’ price sensitivity, emphasized by the present economic crisis, the interest for
such products is limited to certain customer categories, with a more developed social
conscience and with a higher interest on long term effects of the consumption. At the same
time, there exists also a tendency towards increasing sensitivity of product using costs that
might enhance the interest for individual and social implications of the consumption
process.

Price fairness is a new marketing approach oriented on assessing the equity of sellercustomer report during a transaction. At the base of this concept is the equity theory that
states an exchange might be perceived as fair when the cost/benefit report is the same for
all parties (suppliers, buyers) (Adams, 1965). This theory focuses on social justice, showing
that people judge an outcome as fair when the ratio of their own inputs and outputs matches
the input-output ratio of comparing others. For example, input might be represented by the
price paid and output by the product obtained in a transaction.
Kahneman et al (1986) have considered that a key concept in fairness analysis is reference
transaction, characterized by a reference price or wage for customers or employees and by a
reference profit for the firm. From this concept derives the principle of dual entitlement that
means employees/customers are entitled to a reference wage/price and the firm to a
reference profit. Any attempt to change this ratio will generate an unfairness situation.
According to this principle, a price rise must be based on a cost increase. Thus, a price rise
is considered unfair when it leads to profit enhancement and fair when it sustains profit
maintaining.
According to Xia et al (2004), price fairness is “consumer’s assessment and associated
emotions regarding of whether the difference (or lack of a difference) between a seller’s
price and the price of a comparative other party in a transaction is reasonable, acceptable or
justifiable” (p.3). Fairness perception is a comparative process that in pricing area means a
comparison between current price and a reference point, which might be a price paid in
another buying occasion, a price set by another store, the level of estimated cost for the
product, the price paid by another person. The last type is a social comparison that has a
more intense effect on perceived price fairness, because people accept with difficulty to pay
more than other persons (Xia et al, 2004).
By comparing the current price with the reference point might be obtained equality, an
advantageous inequality or a disadvantageous inequality, generating a price fairness or
unfairness perception. Xia et al (2004) made a separation between the two concepts, price
unfairness perception being considered clearer, sharper and more concrete than the price
fairness perception.
Depending on comparison procedure used, most of the authors consider price fairness
might be of two types: distributive and procedural. Distributive fairness refers to the
modality resources or rewards are allocated between the parties in a transaction, the
measure in which there exists a fair report between the investment made and the reward
received (Cox, 2001, Goodwin and Ross, 1992). For price fairness, the investment is
represented by the price paid which is compared with an expectation base reference point
(expected price based on past experience) or a social-based reference point (price paid by
another person) (van den Bos et al, 1998).
Procedural fairness refers to the procedure used to attain a certain objective, “to the process
underlying and leading to the eventual returns” (Diller, 2008, p. 353). In pricing area,
procedural fairness takes into consideration the price setting rules and other procedures
used to determine a certain price structure.
The report between distributive and procedural fairness was debated in the literature, but
there are divergent opinions. The sensibility to social reference points determines

customers, so in this case distributive fairness is more important than procedural fairness.
This idea is outlined by van den Bos et al (1998) that found out “ if people receive
outcomes that are better or worse than expected, they use procedural fairness to assess how
to react to their outcome but that they rely less on procedure information when they receive
outcomes that are equal to, better than, or worse than those of comparison others“ (p. 1501).
When customers don’t have information about procedure they make inferences about it,
taking into consideration the outcome. Thus if they perceive the price level is unfair they
are prone to infer that procedure used to calculate this price is also unfair. A procedure is
considered fairer if it is more frequently used because consumers accept easier procedures
they are used with. A price increase is considered fairer when it is indicated a motive for
this action comparing with not indicating any motive (Schein, 2002).
There are also opinions that sustain another fairness type, interactional, that concerns the
treatment of individual in a transaction (respect, courtesy, apology) and it is manifested
especially in services sector (Goodwin and Ross, 1992, Vrânceanu, 2007).
Diller (2008) proposed a model in which considers price fairness as a multidimensional
construction that has seven components: distributive fairness, consistent behavior, price
honesty, price reliability, influence/right of codetermination, personal respect and regard for
partner, fair dealing . In his view, distributive fairness means, in a transaction, any partner
should not try to improve his position unilaterally, obtaining a gain by imposing an
equivalent loss to the other. Consistent behavior means the seller maintains the price
procedure along the collaboration period with the customer and announce him in due time
in the case he wants to change this procedure. Price honesty means to offer to customers’
information about price and payment conditions that might be complete, accurate, easily
comprehensible and unadulterated. This component of fairness considers seller has not to
take advantage of consumer because the last one is not so careful in processing pricing
information. Frequently, the customers do not know the after-purchase costs that are
important to estimate the total product value. As a measure for honest prices, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency introduced in 1992, the Energy Star program, a voluntary
labeling program aimed to help consumers to evaluate the gain obtained from an energy
efficient product. This program provides total cost of ownership information, allowing
consumers to add the expected energy costs to the initial purchase price (Ayres and
Nalebuff, 2003).
Price reliability represents compliance of the prices established in the contract, even if
some conditions are changing. The right of influence and co-determination concern giving
customer possibility to offer contra-arguments about a price procedure, not to impose him
this procedure. Negotiated prices are perceived fairer than fixed ones because customer has
a certain control degree on price setting. Haws and Bearden (2006) demonstrated that price
fairness perceptions depend on customer’ control degree on price procedure in a
transaction. Respect and regard for the partner are oriented on developing long term
relationships, based on equitable behavior. Thus, a more powerful partner should not
exercise excessive pressure, despite the interest of the other and he must show
understanding in his problems. Fair dealing concept means flexibility in unforeseen
situations and generosity in covering contract obligations, when are seen questionable
solutions.

resources mobilization through innovative activities aiming to offer a social value, rather
than enhancing personal income or increasing shareholders’ profit (Austin et al., 2006). The
social entrepreneurship means launching high innovative products with a significant social
impact, aimed to long term satisfying some basic needs that could not been covered by
organizations oriented on commercial entrepreneurship. In this way, the social
entrepreneurship has an important contribution to sustainable development. Social
entrepreneurship orientation is sustained by the general strategy of the organization, in the
conditions of assuming the corporate social responsibility in a great measure. Transaction
fairness is an essential feature of the social entrepreneurship, thus the fair price represents
an instrument used to do, on a long term, a correct distribution, for both parties in a
transaction, concerning the ratio between the resources consumed and the benefits received.
Also, the social entrepreneurship militates for social equity, implying to assure differential
prices to support disadvantaged categories and to stimulate some social changes.
4. Research on fairness perceptions of differential prices
Differential prices for the same product represent one of the most discussed topics
concerning fairness. These prices are based on customer segment differences taking into
account several criteria: purchase moment, geographic area, quantity purchased or customer
type. One special category is represented by dynamic prices that are changing on time,
depending on customer’s behavior considered individually. One representative example is
price determination for air transport services that depends on the period of time between
ticket acquisition and travel moment.
The customers accept easier pricing differences when the costs are different (a lower price
for a water bottle in a supermarket comparing with the same product price in a restaurant)
or when some social norms concerning special treatments are imposed (preferential prices
for seniors, undergraduates) (Garbarino and Lee, 2003). Offering information about
differential prices motives increases positive fairness perceptions. For differential prices on
time, Haws and Bearden (2006) also demonstrated that consumers consider price changes
over a more extended time period fairer than changes on a very short time period,
especially for low price products category.
Research methodology and results
Campbell (1999) has demonstrated that inferred motive for a price increase has a direct
influence on fairness perceptions. When a firm has a negative motive to take advantage to
the customer, the price is perceived unfair comparing with the situation when the firm uses
the price increase to sustain social causes (charitable ones). We may thus suppose that
offering lower prices for pupils/students is perceived fairer when the firm motivates this
action as a measure to sustain a financial underprivileged category, than when it intends to
maintain its sales volume on long term, by achieving loyalty within these categories.
Therefore, we may formulate the next statistical hypothesis:
•

122

H1: Differential prices are perceived fairer for social motives than for company’s
perceptions and buying intentions. Campbell (1999) has evidenced a direct influence of
perceived unfairness on buying intentions. So we may suppose:
•

H2: Price fairness has a direct influence on perceived value and on buying
intentions

Company’s message framing might have a significant influence on perceptions. Levin and
Gaeth (1988) showed that perceptions of the quality of ground beef depended on how it had
been labeled as “75% lean” or “25% fat.” They have found that the beef was perceived as
better tasting and less greasy when it was presented in a positive light (75% lean) rather
than in a negative light (25% fat). So, we may suppose that the differential price motive
framed in a positive manner conducts to a fairer price perception than when it is framed in a
negative way.
•

H3: Differential prices’ motive framing influences fairness perceptions

In a segmentation made on criteria such as age or graduation status, customers do not carry
on any effort to belong to a certain category, named also objective eligibility comparing
with the case in which segmentation is done on a behavioral criterion (e.g. purchase
frequency), named also behavioral eligibility. Thus, the persons that belong to some
categories (students, seniors) are considered entitled to differential prices (Xia et al, 2004,
Campbell, 1999), so we may suppose:
•

H4: Differential prices on graduation stage (graduate/non-graduate) are perceived
fairer than differential prices on buying behavior (occasional shopper/regular
shopper).

In a qualitative research whose purpose was to identify price fairness perceptions in
Romanian market, Cǎtoiu and Vrânceanu (2007) found out that zone pricing is perceived
the most unfair tactic comparing to differential prices on time or on customer category.
These findings might contribute to the next hypothesis substantiation:
•

H5: Differential prices on geographic area are perceived less fair than differential
prices based on customer category (on graduation stage and on buying behavior)

To evaluate price fairness perceptions of differential prices and to test the previous
hypotheses, there have been conducted three marketing experiments, using completely
randomized design scheme. The scenarios have exposed the case of a fitness club that has
used three types of differential prices, subjects being asked to express their opinion on price
fairness, value and buying intentions, on a Likert scale with 7 levels (1-Strongly disagree to
7-Strongly agree). For all three experiments, the sample was composed of 100 students,
average age 19.8 years old, 30 percent males.
In the first experiment, the two scenarios presented the situation of buying a service that has
been offered with differential prices on graduation stage (an undergraduate versus to a
graduate). The independent variable was the club motive to set differential prices, with two
variants: social motive, oriented on customers and sales volume maintaining motive,
oriented on company. The experiment scenario structure was: an undergraduate pays less
than a graduate because: 1) an undergraduate has a lower income comparing with a
graduate; 2) once an undergraduate becomes used to the club services, he will continue his

variables were, as mentioned before: price fairness, value and buying intentions.
According to the results, the price fairness mean for social oriented motive (M=6.12) is
greater than for company oriented motive (M=5.68).The differential prices are perceived
fairer when they are motivated by the company intention to sustain a unprivileged
customers category concerning income level, than when are based on company desire to
maintain sales volume level. Applying ANOVA analysis resulted F1,98=5.037, p<0.05, thus
motive type has a significant influence on price fairness perception, hypothesis H1 being
accepted.
The Pearson correlation coefficient between price fairness and value is 0.602 (p<0.01) that
demonstrates the existence of a relatively strong relationship between these variables. Thus
a fair price generates a great value perception. The correlation between price fairness and
buying intentions is weaker than in the previous case 0.314 (p<0.01), but it is statistic
significantly. Thus hypothesis H2 is accepted, price fairness has a direct influence on value
and on buying intentions.
In the second experiment, the independent variable was represented by the manner of
motive framing for differential prices on customer category (regular versus occasional
shoppers). The dependent variables were also: price fairness, value and buying intentions.
The scenario structure for the second experiment was: a regular shopper pays less than an
occasional shopper because: 1) a regular shopper assures a steady income to cover costs;
2) an occasional shopper does not assure a steady income to cover costs.
The results show that motive framing for prices difference has an insignificant influence on
price fairness perception, as F1,98= 0.48, p>0.1. Thus, hypothesis H3 is not accepted. The
correlation coefficient between price fairness and value is 0.665 (p<0.01) and between price
fairness and buying intentions is 0.590 (p<0.01). This shows a direct, pretty strong
relationship between price fairness and value, respectively buying intentions, that confirms
again hypothesis H2.
In the third experiment, customers’ perceptions were evaluated for the case of differential
prices on geographic areas. The experimental factor was the motive framing for these
prices, the dependent variables and their measurement were the same as in previous two
experiments. The scenario structure was: a shopper from a non-central club’s location pays
less than a shopper from a central club’s location because: 1) in the central area the costs
are higher; 2) in the non-central area the costs are lower.
According to the results, framing of the motive for differential prices on geographic area
has no influence on price fairness F1,98=0.054, p>0.1, so, as in the second experiment, H3 is
not accepted. The correlation coefficient of price fairness with value is 0.673 (p<0.01) and
with buying intentions is 0.648, (p<0.01) that sustains for the third time hypothesis H2.
Making a comparison between the three marketing experiments, we may analyze what the
type of differential prices is perceived to be fairest. Price fairness mean for differential
prices on graduation stage is M=5.9, and on buying behavior is M=5.69, showing a
favorable attitude to these two prices categories. Because the difference between the two
means is not significant, t=-1.243, d.f.=198, p>0.1, we can not validate H4. We may
conclude that there are not statistically significant differences among price fairness

versus graduates) and on buying behavior (regular versus occasional shoppers).
For differential prices on geographic area, perceived fairness mean is M=4.74, showing an
attitude only slightly favorable, despite the fact the motive that justifies them are cost
oriented. Fairness perception of this type of price is significantly different comparing to the
other two types of differential prices: on graduation stage (t=5.86, d.f.=198, p<0.01) and on
buying behavior (t=4.35, d.f.=198, p<0.01). We may conclude that hypothesis H5 is
accepted, differential prices on geographic area are perceived less fair than differential
prices based on customer category (on graduation stage and on buying behavior). To
sustain differential prices on geographic area, the company has to offer complete and
persuasive information about the reason of applying this tactic, because customers are more
reluctant to accept it.
Conclusions, managerial implications and further researches
Sustainable development allows to a company to effectively allocate its resources as to
satisfy the interests of all stakeholders and to assure the possibility to develop its businesses
in the future. Sustainable marketing represents a new orientation focused on satisfying
customers and other stakeholders’ needs by offering them the best value, pursuing the
society and environment interests on long term. It requires a rethinking of marketing mix
variables, comparing with the traditional vision.
The price is one of the key marketing mix variables that might have an important
contribution to a sustainable development. By using a fair price there is generated an ethic
behavior that implies not to speculate a power position, an offer scarcity, a low information
degree or other situations that may affect all the stakeholders’ interests. Price contribution
to sustainable development also consists of covering some environment protection taxes,
offering deals for social responsible behaviors, collecting funds for ecological causes and
reducing consumption of energy, of non-renewable resources or of products that might
affect the environment.
Differential prices represent a tactic often used by commercial firms, being exposed to
many critics by customers, regarding its fairness. In the first marketing experiment from
this paper, we have demonstrated that differential prices on graduation stage are perceived
fairer for a social oriented motive (an undergraduate has a lower income comparing with a
graduate) than for company oriented motive (once an undergraduate becomes used to the
club services, he will continue his habit after finishing school and assures a steady income
to cover the costs). According to these results, a company that set differential prices has to
be social oriented, to sustain the interests of underprivileged categories, by offering them
lower prices, thus acting in accordance with sustainable development principles.
The way of framing the motives for differential prices has no influence on fairness
perceptions, as we have demonstrated in the second and in the third experiment, these
findings having implications in promotional decisions.
The fairest differential prices perceived, among the prices types analyzed, were those on
customer category, both on graduation stage and on buying behavior, the difference
between them not being statistically significant. Differential prices on geographic area have
been perceived much less fair comparing with the previous two types. In this case, the firm
costs, competitors’ prices) to increase customers’ acceptance.
In all the three marketing experiments presented in this paper it was demonstrated that price
fairness perception has a direct influence on perceived value and on buying intentions for a
product. A company that set fair prices is perceived as offering a good value for money,
increasing the satisfaction of its customers. In sustainable marketing, in order to justify the
price to be paid, it is essential to communicate the value offered by environment
improvement. Also, a fair price boosts buying intentions and may increase customers’
loyalty, thus sustaining the business in the future. By offering fair prices, a commercial firm
may contribute to a sustainable development, offering to its customers a good value and
being social responsible.
The present paper approached an aspect of pricing policy much debated concerning its
fairness that is the tactic of differential prices. In further researches it might be studied the
price role as a vector of social entrepreneurship, a real interest being represented by
estimating the price customers would be willing to pay for a product, in the case the
obtained profit is intended to support social causes.
Another direction for a future study is done by the changes produced in retailing, that
stimulated launching durable stores by some companies (e.g. Starbucks, Wall Mart,
Safeway). They trade organic products, with a high safety degree, both for people health
and for environment protection, use renewable energy, offer recyclable bags, set fair prices
in relation to product utility. Such a vision about stores takes also into consideration the
building, the atmosphere and the work force management. In this respect, it would be
interesting to analyze, in a future research, customers’ perceptions on price importance
reporting to the other retail marketing mix components for durable stores and doing some
comparisons with the traditional stores.

