

Introduction
This paper reports the investigation of automotive manufacturers and suppliers have to face by
meeting the requirements of End-of-Life Vehicle (ELV) legislation [1, 2]. ELV is the term
when a vehicle comes to the end of its useful life, whether this is naturally due to wear and tear
or prematurely (such as an accident) [3]. Mass production of cars is accountable for more than
a million ELVs each year in the UK [4]. Production of cars has grown steadily over the past




30 years to the point where in 2016 around 95 million were produced worldwide [5]. It had
become necessary for legislation to put in place to ensure that automotive producers make their
vehicles more sustainable [4]. The European Directive 2000/53/EC “ELV Directive” seeks to
make dismantling and recycling of ELVs more environmentally friendly [1]. It is also used to
regulate recycling procedure and the ratio of how much material should be recycled [6].
With automotive components, it is generally believed that costs occur throughout production and the product’s life cycle. While manufacturers of course consider the costs of
production, it is equally important that they consider the costs associated at End of Life
(EoL), owing to ELV directive putting responsibility on the producer. Therefore, it is becoming
increasingly important to consider the cost of disposal from the design stage to improve the
efficiency in EoL. Xu et al. [7]; Cheung and Pachisia [8] state that a factor in the accomplishment of production and delivery of function need is cost. To be more competitive, manufacturers will need to consider many factors whilst also reducing costs.
Disregarding EoL costs would make it easier to meet requirements specified by legislation,
as it is possible to recycle virtually 100% of an ELV. Economically this would be unreasonable, as it could be unprofitable to the Original Equipment manufacturers (OEMs). EoL costs
consist of creating, operating, maintaining, replacing, and then disposing of a product. The
costs required to meet the ELV legislation will help the OEM to decide if a product is viable.
The components of the ELV’s are usually recycled, reused, remanufactured, disposed or a
combination of these attributes. Each of these methods has a cost associated with them,
therefore these costs will need to be factored into new vehicles as the manufactures are
required to be directly responsible for the environmental impacts of their products.
Manufacturers have to take a more ethical approach to ensure components have been
designed with the ability to be reused, recycled, recovered, and remanufactured. As part of this
process it is essential to ensure that all vehicles can be easily de-polluted. The ELV legislation
also requires that at the design stage, preventive measures are in place to reduce the use of
hazardous substances to facilitate recycling [2]. Car manufacturers are under increasing
pressure to accept responsibility for the complete life cycle of the vehicles they produced
due to the implementation of government legislation. This requires a set of targets to be met for
recycling, re-use and recovery. To confront with these targets, manufacturers have to prepare
for EoL scenarios by considering them at the design stage. EoL is an important factor to be
considered from the design stage as environmental impacts can be locked-in at this early stage.
Therefore, this paper aims to demonstrate an approach to automotive manufacturers to estimate
the end of life cost of a vehicle’s components. Two automotive parts are used to validate the
approach and the method could allow OEM to select the most cost effective way of dealing
with ELV. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: “Literature review” section
describes the background literature; “The proposed end-of-life cost prediction method for
ELV” section presents the proposed method; “Case studies” section discusses the relevant case
studies and finally the conclusion and future work are presented in “Conclusion and further
work” section.

Literature review

99

However, according to EU’s legislations [10] the consideration of end-of-life of a product is
becoming very critical for OEMs in order to meet the target of reducing the amount of waste.
Legislation for waste disposal was introduced due to an increased environmental awareness
and the ever-decreasing lack of landfill space [1]. Anderson et al. [11] predict that growth of
ELVs from 2005 to 2030 will have a significant increase of nearly 50%. Vermeulen et al. [12]
describe how most developed countries have introduced legislation to make re-use, recovery,
and recycling mandatory and that member states must establish a collection system for ELV’s.
They state that the EU Directive aims to prevent vehicle waste by reducing hazardous
substances, designing with disassembly, re-use and recycling in mind, and increasing the use
of recyclable materials. The EU-Directive states that by 2006 [13], at least 85% reuse and
recovery and 80% re-use and recycling must be achieved, and these targets were set to rise in
2015 to 95% and 85% [12].
It is reported that every year around 8–9 million tonnes of waste is generated due
to ELV’s [2, 14]. The EU directive was established to encourage the reduction of
waste. The directive aims to reduce the environmental impact of ELV by promoting
re-use, recycling, and recovery. This initiative forces the automotive manufacturer to
take responsibility for its product’s disposal and by doing so, encourages manufacturers to make their products more sustainable. The ELV directive states that no more
than 5% of a vehicle can be sent to landfill, leaving the remainder to be recycled or
re-used. Data from 2014 [15] revealed that waste sent to landfill was cut by a third in
a year to achieve an all-time low.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) [15] state that the EU
recycling and recovery targets require 95% of ELV’s to be recycled and recovered. As
a result, industries are developing better strategies for coping with the waste. Vehicle
scrapping over the past 4 years has fallen from 2.1 million per year between 2003
and 2009 to almost 1.85 million per year [15]. EoL treatment, recovery, and recycling
are ultimately an OEM’s responsibility, therefore they need to design their products in
a way that minimises or eliminates environmental impact or makes the product easier
to recycle at end-of-life [16, 17]. Gonzalez and Adenso-Diaz [18] mentioned the five
alternatives such as disposal, recycling, reuse, repair, or remanufacturing for a product
at end-of-life. They state that reuse, remanufacturing and repair are the better options
for their environmental impact. However, they are not necessarily the best options due
to the high cost associated with them [18].
Recycling would be a more viable option if disassembly cost was not so expensive. If
products were designed with dismantling in mind then this would lower the EoL cost but this
in turn may increase production costs. Das et al. [19] discussed that disassembly is gradually
becoming more widespread and frequently used in industry. They suggest several reasons for
this, including:

&
&
&
&
&

retrieving valuable and reusable vehicle parts,
separation processes which allow for downstream material recovery,
hazardous and toxic materials removed,
remanufacturing to elongate lifespan, and
to break up the proprietary components.



Thierry et al. [20] declare that from the design stage, OEMs need to consider different
materials, their value, their environmental impacts, and the way the components and materials
are assembled [21]. To achieve a more sustainable automotive production, OEMs will need to
consider design for sustainability which involves economical, social, and ecological aspects.
Mcauley [22] states that automotive manufacturers need to consider the product’s entire life
cycle and its overall environmental impact during the design stage. To reduce or remove the
impact they can minimise materials of concern and integrate design for recycling, disassembly,
and reuse. To ensure long term sustainability, energy consumption and environmental impact
must be greatly reduced during the life cycle. Keoleian and Menerey [23] promote a systematic
approach to reduce environmental impact using life cycle design. This method balances
environmental impact with satisfying customer needs.
Hatcher et al. [24] confirm that ‘remanufacturing’ can often be considered an
environmentally sustainable product end-of-life solution. Remanufacturing means the
life of a product is extended and the product does not end up in landfill too soon [25,
26]. Reuse is considered environmentally friendly due to its goal of preserving
resources and energy. Environmentally, repair and remanufacturing are a good option
as they extend a product’s life. To ensure life-cycle longevity, OEMs should design
their products to allow the user to be able to look after and maintain them. Design for
disassembly means that vehicle’s parts can be easily removed to repair or replace
which makes maintenance easier. Overall, cost is an important factor whilst designers
have to comply with ELV legalisation, they should also consider the costs associated
to a component once it has reached the end of its life at the design stage.

The proposed end-of-life cost prediction method for ELV
As suggested by Cheung et al. [9]‘s finding, most companies do not consider EoL costs in
design. However the design stage is very crucial as a product’s impact is often ‘locked in’ at
this stage. By developing a cost estimation method to predict products EoL costs at the design
stage, this will help product designers to consider the economic aspect. The scope of this
section therefore discusses the different EoL options in terms of cost.
Reuse is often the first option manufacturers consider. Reuse would provide the most costeffective method due to no cost for additional processes. This is not always possible as EoL
parts tend not to be in a usable condition without requiring rework. In accordance with the
literature’s finding the main EoL options are (i) recycling; (ii) remanufacturing; (iii)
refurbishing and (iv) disposal as illustrated in Fig. 1. The method is based on Gonzalez and
Adenso-Diaz [18]‘s approach in “Product life cycle and end of life cycle”. The following
sections examine how each of these cost options is formulated.

Product end-of-life cost prediction
With increasing environmental awareness within the EU, several directives such as Waste
Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE); Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS)
and the ELV have been implemented to reduce the quantity of waste and toxic materials and

101
Start

Raw Materials

Materials can be
used aŌer recycled

Manufacturing
Products/Parts can be
used aŌer refurbished

Parts can be
used aŌer
remanufactured

Use
Products/Parts straight to
the disposal stage
End of Life

Remanufacturing

Refurbishing

Recycling

Disposal

Reclaim material
residual value

Yes

Treatment
Recovery

No

End

Fig. 1 The proposed method of processing ELV cost options (Adopted from Gonzalez and Adenso-Diaz [18])

for a product to be easily dismantled at EoL and this will allow for ease of re-use, recycling,
and remanufacture [27–30]. Disassembly allows components and materials to be broken down
into individual parts. There are two types of disassembly [30]:
(i) Non-destructive disassembly is the systematic process of removing parts from an assembly whilst ensuring that no damage occurs as a result of the process.
(ii) Destructive disassembly involves separating materials for recycling.
Bogue [27] mentions the factors that affect disassembly should be considered. Bogue
concludes by saying that DFD allows manufacturers to comply with legislation and produce
more cost-effective, environmentally friendly products. Disassembly is difficult to calculate as
various factors can affect the result, such as; component complexity, fastening methods, part
fragility, wear resistance, and ease of identification and handling. Disassembly depth factor



For calculating the disassembly depth factor:
f ¼

Number ofassemblies to disassemble
Total Number of Assemblies

ð1Þ

This is based on the following assumptions and details:

&
&
&
&

each assembly can be disassembled in the same time,
disassembly divides an assembly into fundamental components and low-level assemblies,
the time for individual component separation equals the disassembly time for the whole
assembly,
model treats as a component when entire assembly is targeted.

However, this is not a realistic assumption. For example, when considering a component
fixed with 50 screws against one fixed with quick joints, and then quick joints will be easier
and faster to disassemble. Situations like this make it difficult to devise a method for
calculating disassembly which can be used across various components.

Recycling
Yan et al. [31] state that the process of recycling involves recovering used components and
materials to use as raw materials. This definition is also supported by the ELV directive in that
“recycling means reprocessing in a production process of the waste materials for the original
purpose or for other purposes [32]”. The associated costs that need to be considered for recycling
are: disassembly, cleaning, and recycling (material processing, manufacturing, packaging, and
assembly). It is believed that 75% of ELV’s are made of metals [33] which is the material that is
mostly recycled at EoL. Other materials such as plastics and rubber will have to be considered
too. Sakai et al. [34] discussed how recycling of Automotive Shredder Residue (ASR) is difficult
due to the complexity of separating the materials; in particular the hazardous waste. During the
design stage, manufacturers should look to reduce the number of materials and consider the
environmental impact to make EoL manageable. For recycling option the proposed method has
adapted Dantec’s approach [35] of calculating recycling cost. In this cost model:
(i) recycling cost is defined as the amount of money to invest to remove targeted parts;
(ii) RVi represents the removal value of targeted parts; and
(iii) RCi represents the removal cost of targeted parts.
Recycling Cost ¼ ΣðRVi −RCi Þ

ð2Þ

RVi ¼ ΣððPartsi Â MVm −OCi Þ Â Wi Þ

ð3Þ

RCi ¼ ΣðRTi Â f Â LÞ

ð4Þ

Where:
Partsi
Wi

MVm
RTi
L
OCi
f

103

the mass material value of parts (£/kg)
the time necessary to remove one type i part (hr)
the hourly wage (£/hr)
opportunity cost (£/kg). The opportunity cost corresponds to the revenue the
dismantler would make by selling the parts to the shredder [35].
disassembly depth factor

Remanufacturing
Ijomah et al. [36] state that “remanufacturing is a process of returning a used product to at least
the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) performance specification from the customers’
perspective and giving the resultant product a warranty that is at least equal to that of a newly
manufactured equivalent”. According to Ijomah et al. [37], remanufacturing can be both
profitable and less harmful to the environment than conventional manufacturing as it reduces
landfill and the levels of virgin material, energy and specialised labour used in production.
Costs to be considered for remanufacturing are disassembly, cleaning, redesign and
remanufacturing. Hatcher et al. [24] research shows that decisions made during the design
process can greatly affect the remanufacturing process’s ‘efficiency and effectiveness’. To
determine remanufacturing cost, the proposed method has adapted Shu et al. [38]‘s approach
of predicting the expense of remanufacturing. This adapted remanufacturing cost model
however is focused on disassembly and assembly of a part or component using riveting. Costs
associated with restoring of parts or components are excluded in the model. Further explanation of each of the expressions in eq. (5) can be found in reference [38] under section 8.25:
CRM ¼ ððTd þ Ta Þ Â L Â f Þ þ ðP f Â C f Þ þ

ÀÀ
À
Á À
ÁÁ
Á
Ppd þ P f Â Ppe − Ppd Â P f Â Pe Â Cp ð5Þ

Where
Crm
Td
Ta
L
f
Pf
Cf
Ppd
Ppe
Cp

remanufacture cost (£)
disassembly time (hr)
assembly time (hr)
labour rate (£/hr)
disassembly depth factor
probability of fastener failure in disassembly and assembly
cost of fastener failure (£)
probability of part failure in disassembly and assembly
probability of part failure in fastening method extraction
cost of part failure (£)

Refurbishing
Refurbishing is an important part of the manufacturing process. It ensures that those re-usable
components are as capable as new components. Whether the components have failed or not,



likely cost to refurbish is according to component failure/degradation rate data [39]. In order to
determine refurbishing cost, the proposed method has adapted Zhou et al. [39]‘s cost model as
shown in eq. (6):


−λt
ð6Þ
CRefurbish ¼ Σ Cgood e−λt þ Cfailure ð1−e Þ þ f Â L Â ðTd þ Ta Þ
Where:
Cgood
Cfailure
t
Td
Ta
f
L
λ

cost to refurbish a target part/component in good condition (£)
cost to refurbish a target component has failed (£)
expected lifetime of product (usually per million depends on degradation rate λ)
time to completely disassembly product (hr)
time to completely assembly product (hr)
disassembly depth factor
labour rate (£/hr)
degradation rate (failure per million hr)

Implementation
Microsoft Visual Basic was used to develop the software program. A user interface has been
created as shown in Fig. 2. and this will to allow a designer to incorporate ELV costing into the
design process to compare EoL options to understand which the most economical option for

105

execute the software by selecting all options individually so that a comparison of EoL costs
can be performed. The relevant source code of the software system is shown in Appendix A.

Case studies
Two case studies are used to validate the approach and the chosen vehicle components are (i) a
registration plate lamp light and (ii) a brake pad. These two components are made of different
materials and manufacturing methods.

Registration plate lamp light
Fig. 3 illustrates a ‘registration plate lamp light’, when it reaches the end of its life,
the light can no longer illuminate the number plate or if the light becomes too dull.
To ensure the light is bright enough, the upper polymer housing is made of polycarbonate. It also has a very high impact resistance which is an important factor when
designing these components to be used on the external of a car. The lower housing of
the light is made of polypropylene which only absorbs minimal water and has low
permeability. There is also a rubber seal inside the housing to prevent water from
entering. Once it has reached the end-of-its useful life, and evaluation of its EoL is
represented by the flow chart as shown in Fig. 4.
The registration plate lamp light consists of 5 components that require disassembly
so the disassembly depth factor can be calculated as shown in Fig. A1 Appendix B.
By taking the disassembly depth factor into account of, the following EoL costs can
be determined.

&

EoL Option 1 - Remanufacturing cost

The whole part can be remanufactured for reuse. The fasteners are snap-fits which can



OEM product
take-back
Number plate
lamp light
disassembled

EOL options

Remanufacturing
To the use
stage as
shown in
Fig 1.

Dispose of rubber
seal

Incinerate rubber
seal

Recycling

Landfill rubber
sealer

To the raw
materials
stage as
shown in Fig 1.

Polymer housing
and copper wires

Fig. 4 EoL process of a vehicle’s registration plate lamp light

of fastener failure is relatively high. Remanufacturing cost can be calculated as shown in
Fig. A2 (Appendix B).

&

EoL Option 2 – Recycling cost

As seen in Appendix B, Fig. A3, A4 and A5 illustrate recycling evaluations of three
different sub-components and materials of the vehicle’s number lamp light. Recycling all the
components would be a low cost for the OEM as each individual material has a low cost to
compare with remanufacturing.

&
&
&
&

Compare EoL costs of the registration plate lamp light (Fig. 5.):
Option 1 represents remanufacturing of the whole part.
Option 2 represents recycling the whole part.
Option 3 was not calculated as this component cannot be refurbished.

Fig. 5 shows that recycling is the optimum option for the EoL of the registration plate lamp
light because it’s cheaper than remanufacturing.


107

Fig. 5 Registration Plate Lamp EoL cost comparison

temperatures. Therefore they need a high resistance to heat and must be able to recover quickly
from extreme heat application. The material needs to be smooth to provide even contact with
the rotor. The brake pad is semi-metallic and is made of a mix of synthetics and flaked metals
bonded together by various resins. These materials make it hard and resistant to wear. The
shim is a thin layer of metal used to reduce brake noise caused by imperfections. The
aluminium shim is riveted onto the steel base plate and an adhesive is used to join the pad
to the plate. Once a brake pad becomes unsafe to continue using, then it can be considered at
the end of its useful life. Fig 7 represents the EoL options of brake pads when they reached the
end-of-their-useful life.
The part is made up of 5 components; two rivets, steel base plate, aluminium shim, and
semi-metallic brake pad, so the disassembly depth factor can be calculated as shown in
Appendix B Fig. A6. By taking the disassembly depth factor into account of, the following
brake pad’s EoL costs can be determined.

&

EoL Option 1 - Remanufacture

The brake pad and rivets cannot be remanufactured so that remanufacturing cost of the
metal plates can be estimated as shown in Fig. A7 (Appendix B). The probability of fastener
Steel Plate

Aluminium Shim

Brake Pad



OEM product
take-back

Brake pad
disassembled

EOL opƟons

Remanufacturing
aluminium shim
and steel plate

Refurbish
aluminium shim
and steel plate

Recycling

Semi-metallic brake pad
and rivets

To the raw
materials
stage as
shown in Fig 1.

Fig. 7 EoL options of a brake pad

failure is 100% as the rivets must be drilled to disassemble the brake pad. The probability of
part failure is low because the other components are strong and the number of fasteners is
minimal.

&

EoL Option 2 - Refurbishing

The brake pads and rivets cannot be refurbished but the metal plates can be reused. The
degradation rate was obtained from Carnegie Mellon University [40]. This option looks
already quite expensive for the OEM. The calculation of the refurbishing cost is shown in
Fig. A8 (Appendix B).

&

Recycling for EoL Options 1 and 2

The brake pad can be recycled for options 1 and 2, the cost of recycling for these two
options are shown in Fig. A9 under Appendix B. This calculation shows that recycling the pad
and rivets is least expensive.

&

EoL Option 3
This option also gives a low recycling cost as shown in Fig. A10 (Appendix B)
Compare EoL costs of the brake pad, as seen in Fig. 8:

–
–
–


109

Fig. 8 A brake pad’s EoL cost comparison

As seen in Fig. 8 that option 3 of recycling the whole component is an optimum solution as
it works out significantly cheaper. It is also more ideal as it only requires one process whereas
the other options require multiple processes.

Conclusion and further work
For the case study it would have been preferential to have had accurate and consistent data
from one source to achieve a more reliable result for EoL costing analysis. However, as this
was not possible, therefore assumptions were made based on different sources. This should
give an approximate representation of the costs OEMs can expect to encounter at EoL.
The average retail price of the registration plate lamp light is £9. Any of the EoL options
chosen would mean that around 50% of the retail price would cover EoL recovery cost. This
indicates that there may have been over estimated. The proposed approach is also used
estimated data for material value and opportunity cost. This will have led to a degree of
inaccuracy. This implies that there have been inaccuracies in the values inputted into the
software. It is possible that the average time of dismantling the part is unrealistically high as it
was not dismantled by a trained labourer.
Due to cost, recycling appeared to be the optimum option for both parts. Realistically this
might not be true as it is not necessarily the most economically-viable solution. Recycling adds
no value to the product and its associated parts. Therefore it should only really be considered if
the other options are not available. All of the EoL options point to disassembly being a major
contributing factor to EoL cost. In the literature review, it was discovered that if disassembly
was made easier then EoL costs could be reduced. To reduce costs, the following should be
considered:
–
–

–
–



Using fewer materials within components.
Automate the disassembly process.

These options should only be considered if they do not affect quality, safety and functionality of the product.
To increase the accuracy of the estimations, a more comprehensive view of disassembly is
needed. The disassembly depth factor in this study simplifies the time taken for disassembly
and does not take into account the amount of fasteners or complexity of the fasteners.
Therefore a new method for calculating disassembly is needed to ensure the cost estimations
are more accurate.

