Excellence fosters convergence in higher education systems within the European Union.
The smooth application of quality management along with liberalization of services, capital
and persons leads to harmonization in education across Europe and further on to sustainable
convergence.
Excellence and convergence are two different qualities of higher education. Excellence
represents an intrinsic value of higher education, while convergence is an external feature
of that, and also a goal of the EU. If excellence is differently perceived by each education
institution (depending on the specificity of its members, its organizational culture and the
socioeconomic and political conditions), convergence is based on a degree of discipline,
harmonisation and compliance with pre-established criteria. Internationalization is a
dimension of excellence but also a result of convergence in European higher education
(figure 1).
Student and academic staff mobility is a consequence of convergence across Europe, but
also a criterion for excellence in quality management models (Teichler, 2012).

Figure 1: Excellence and convergence as purposes of the Bologna Process

Despite the existence of a large diversity of educational policies and education systems
within EU countries, we consider that the application of a unique excellence model (or of a
restricted number of models) would improve convergence of the higher education European
system. Excellence could be related to personal performances, to organizational
performance, but also to country performance. Cultural patterns, economic development,
financing sources and allocation, access to education, institutional autonomy - are some of
the factors that determine the differentiation of education systems in EU.
A significant step to higher education convergence in the European Union is the Bologna
process, having as one of the major goals cooperation in quality assurance systems in

standards in this field. Due to requirements on quality assurance that followed Bologna
Declaration (2005), higher education institutions in Europe are basically obliged to
implement their own internal quality system according to their mission, goals and
organisational culture and to comply with the seven standards defined by the European
Standards and Guidelines (ESG) (Rosa et al., 2012). According to the European Quality
Assurance Register for Higher Education (EQAR) (2007, p.7), this is a common framework
formed by “a widely shared set of underpinning values, expectations and good practices in
relation to quality and its assurance”.
However, the convergence in education is a more complex phenomenon which goes behind
economic convergence (Dima et al., 2013), or setting up a common set of rules and
standards.

1. Review of the scientific literature
Peters and Waterman firstly introduced the idea of excellence (1982), the necessity of
defining the concept and also of the measurement of its impact at organizational level.
According to Anninos (2007), excellence can be seen as a dynamical process of
development and progressive transformation of thoughts, feelings and human behaviours,
according to some set of fundamental values, ideas and knowledge.
Within organizations, reaching and maintaining excellence is supported by the systemic
vision of management, the high involvement level of employees, the individual and group
desire of evolution and perfection, the constant changing ability, and also by the
“adaptation to new situations through quality monitoring at each stage of every process
that takes place within the organization” (Anninos and Chytiris, 2011, p.35).
The literature generally accepts that excellence is difficult to be assessed and measured. In
this regard, quality management (QM) models or excellence models have been developed
to stimulate improvements in organizations (Raharjo et al., 2015) and to assess performance
and results.
The business excellence model defines „success for a variety of stakeholders in both
financial and non-financial terms'' (Lascelles and Peacock, 1996, p. 153), while Edgeman
(2000) defines excellence as a 3-D model (individual-organization-society) whose
functionality ensures sustainable development.
On the other hand, one can witness a dichotomy within the approaches of both theoreticians
and practitioners: some work towards finding general models of excellence, while others
tend to analyse, test and (in)validate these models.
Some of these models are highly recognized at international level, such as the European
Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM) (2003), the Malcolm Baldrige National
Quality Award (MBNQA) (2007), the Common Assessment Framework (CAF), Australian
Business Excellence Framework (ABEF) or the “4P” model, a people-oriented model
(Dahlgaard-Park, 2009; Dahlgaard and Dahlgaard-Park, 2007) built on people quality
variable as the essential driver to improve the other 3 variables: partnerships, processes
and products.

of these models and the relationship between different criteria or the cause-effect analysis
between compounding elements called “enablers” and “results” (Dijkstra, 1997; Eskildsen,
1998; Heras-Saizarbitoria et al., 2012).
An example is the analysis of Ghosh et al. (2003), who introduced a structural equation
model that empirically validates the relationships between the elements of the Malcolm
Baldrige National Quality Award MBNQA (2000), proving that leadership is an essential
factor for strategic planning. Another example is provided by Eskildsen (1998), who
conducted a longitudinal study of the EFQM excellence model and used a quantitative
measurement tool that can provide insights into QM practices.
The critical success factors (CSFs) identified by the majority of studies devoted to these
models relate to the implementation process rather than long-term sustainability (Saraph et
al., 1989; Black and Porter, 1996; Tamimi, 1998; Sohal and Terziovski, 2000; Sebastianelli
and Tamimi, 2003) and could be listed as: top leadership commitment, training and
education of staff, HRM, process management and planning, quality data reporting,
communication and customer satisfaction focus.
The excellence model defined by the European Foundation for Quality Management
EFQM) is used to assess the performance of various European organizations. The model is
based on enablers like: leadership, strategy, people, resources and partnerships, and
processes, products and services. The model also comprises four “results” criteria:
customer results, people results, society results, and business results. EFQM is the most
popular model in Europe used by approximately two-thirds of European organisations for
self-performance evaluation. The model is generally referred to as the business excellence
model (BEM). There are various examples and analyses of the model applicability in the
private, public and voluntary fields. The cultural differences between the public sector and
the private sector in the application of the model are underlined by Bendell et al. (1994, p.
48), who identified barriers such as: “lack of individual ownership”, “responsibility or
client care”, “lack of staff empowerment”, “centralised authority and bureaucratic
proceduralisation”, “unclear and multiple customers and stakeholders”, “scale and
complexity issues associated with large centralised organisations”.
The necessity of new models introduction for public sector applicability of TQM was
recognized by Morgan and Murgatroyd (1994), who distinguish between core, adaptive and
problematic concepts, tools and applications (McAdam and Welsh, 2000).
In 2000, the Common Assessment Framework (CAF) was launched as the first European
model specifically tailored for the public sector and it has been used especially in Italy, the
Slovak Republic and Portugal as a basis for their specific public sector quality awards
(Raharjo et al., 2015), the most recent version being CAF 2013.
Within the public sector, education, including higher education, is another field where the
principles of quality management and excellence models can be applied to create better
schools in a market –oriented environment where higher motivated teachers and students
can improve the teaching/learning process (Rosa et al., 2012, Ghinea et al., 2012) and cope
with the increasing pressures of more demanding stakeholders. Many authors consider that
successful tools of TQM which transformed business could be used for education sector to
overcome challenges due to declining resources, the need for more specialized academic
staff, quality standards and criteria, increasing pressures coming from globalization and
every aspect of academic life, such as teaching, learning and administrative side appears to
be a viable solution (Sahney et al., 2004). However, the literature abounds in opinions in
supporting the idea that TQM and excellence models applications in higher education
cannot provide the outcomes expected since higher education institutions are very different
types of organizations with different ethos and particular characteristics and the academic
culture is strong and resistant to principles, concepts and the practicing of this type of
management (like customer relationship management) (Rosa et al., 2012). Rosa and Amaral
(2007) add the lack of communication channels, difficulty in measuring HE results,
individualism and internal competition, bureaucracy, weak leadership commitment.
In their study, McAdam and Welsh (2000) tried to assess the implementation of the
European Model of Total Quality Management to the education colleges in Northern
Ireland, to identify the interests of the various stakeholders, the compatibility of the
interests and the nature of their relationship. There are also cases where the application of
quality management did not contribute to internal improvement (Harvey, 1995).
In 2012, pointing out the importance of business sustainability, Anninos and Chytiris
introduced the concepts of sustainability, integrated management and innovation within
(business) university curricula. Their paper builds on the relation sustainability-excellence
and brings to light the main challenges of sustainable management (Anninos and Chytiris,
2012). They consider that excellence in education is mostly given by the quality of
infrastructure and of the teaching staff, the providing for financial and human resources, the
connection university-business, the connection to foreign institutions, the continuous
adaptation of the curricula to the business environment such that the graduates possess the
knowledge, the aptitudes and abilities in order to become responsible leaders and managers.
According to Cornuel (2007), excellence in education demonstrates the value of business
education for economic development, the universities redirecting their research activities in
solving corporate problems and becoming more competent in the job of educating and
socializing the students. Excellence in business education is about creating value (not only
financial), contributing to sound economic growth, improving human conditions and
balancing social and economic interest (Emiliani, 2004).
Charles D. Kerns (n/a) considers that operational academic excellence is based on
“outstanding teaching, relevant business connections, correlations with practice
applicability, intellectual contributions”, showing at the same time how an integrated
approach of academic excellence can be applied by the faculty. Some of the benefits of
Excellence Model in higher education institutions are: anticipate students’ needs and
expectations; visionary and inspirational leadership; staff commitment and responsibility;
mutual relationships and partnerships, business collaboration and support, recognition and
credibility etc.
Consequently, achieving excellence in higher education is not an easy task as recognized by
various authors (Acito et al., 2008; Cornuel, 2005; Friga et al., 2003; Hamel, 2009). One
major barrier is represented by the fact that business education is delivered differently
among countries or institutions, even within the countries of the European Union.
The relationship between sustainability and business education has been introduced by
practice and experience and further enforced by conferences and special issues by
prestigious journals like Harvard Business Review, Academy of Management Learning and
are educated to produce business solutions scientifically and ethically correct”. This trend is
strengthened by the criticism exercised on the effectiveness of business education and its
contribution to excellence (Anninos and Chytiris, 2011, p. 63; Lefter et al., 2011). The
sustainability issue has a clear influence on all dimensions of education process and in
literature there are various studies and analysis provided especially by specialized literature
(Rodríguez-Solera and Silva-Laya, 2017; Katrinly et al. 2017; Howlett et al. 2016 etc.).
Beyond rules and standards, the excellence for sustainable convergence in higher education
should become a driver for all parties involved: leadership and management, stakeholders,
students and academic staff and it should have dimensions related to policies and structure,
funding, internationalization, and quality assurance.

2. The Higher Education System as Complex Adaptive System
Pursuant to specialised literature (Heylighen et al., 2007; McGarvey and Hannon, 2004;
Cvitanovic et al., 2012), the world is made of a multitude of complex systems, which
function on similar structural characteristics. Within this system of systems, a simple
change of a single component can result in a chain modification of different other
components, leading sometimes to a massive, unpredictable change (Forrester, 1999;
Hanneman, 1988; Sterman, 2000).
According to system theory, any entity or group of living entities, from simple cells to
social organizations, must be seen as a dynamical unit (potential system) which interacts
with other systems within a common framework, which constitutes itself into a supersystem. No system can exist independently, the systems influence each other, and also they
influence the environment, which in turn, due to a rebound effect, can produce a
modification of the systems themselves (Ghinea et al., 2015).
Out of the multitude of definitions of a system we are going to use that of Ackoff (1971).
He presents the system as an entity (of either physical or theoretical nature) made of
interdependent elements which fulfil the following conditions: a. the behaviour of the
elements influence the behaviour of the entire entity; b. there is an interdependency
between the behaviour of the elements and of the entire entity; c. independent of the
structure of the sub-groups of elements, they all have effect on the behaviour of the entire
entity, and no such effect is independent.
If the interdependency relations among the system’s components are not linear, the system
is said to be complex. If the elements of the system, the system itself, and/or its
environment are modified in time due to these interactions, the system is called dynamic.
According to Forrester, complex systems are counter-intuitive, in a way that corrections
induced by a straightforward reading of the hints provided by these systems are often
inefficient or even damaging. The intuitive, simple strategies and policies that are the basis
of human-related experience may produce in case of complex systems negative outcomes
(Forrester, 1999).
An adaptive complex system is a special case in which complexity comes from nonlinearity, diversity and a higher degree of interdependency among the elements, while the
adaptive feature resides in the ability to learn and change based on the own experience

requiring immediate and strong action might prove to be, by elapsing the time range, a
short, self-resolving crisis.
Applying the previously presented concepts to the autonomous education components
(universities, students, government etc.), which interact locally within a global world, we
state the following: the higher education system is a complex dynamical system which,
under proper incentives and management (Dima and Ghinea, 2016), proves to be selfadjusting, maintaining itself in a state of dynamic equilibrium.

3. The Right Strategy for Sustainable Convergence
Good intentions are necessary but not sufficient in order to obtain sustainable convergence
within EU. Without a proper general strategy, the education systems will not be able to
define their own strategies, putting at risk the objectives themselves, and the perception of
the universities within the public eye.
While a business model is a representation of the activity development and of the producing
of value (Teece, 2010), the strategy locates the organization on a long term, with respect to
clients and competitors. Even if the same model can be implemented by various strategies,
the outcome is not always the same. As a consequence, the best strategy and the best model
have to be identified in order to maximize the chances of reaching simultaneously
excellence and sustainable convergence in European higher education.
For the analysis we have chosen four strategies indicated by Harvard Business Review,
namely: low-cost strategy, differentiation strategy, customer relationship management
strategy, and network effect strategy (Society for Human Resource Management, 2006).
Since the customer relationship management strategy relies on the personal connection
between the organization and the customer, and given the fact that the education system
cannot meet the expectations and preferences of all employers, we shall not consider this
type of strategy as appropriate for our approach.
The network effect strategy applies to markets that can offer a dominant position to the
respective organization. Its success is based on the number and variety of (chained)
products and/or services that are offered. The larger the number of products/services, the
higher the value. Also known as the “winner takes it all” strategy, it leaves not much room
to competitors, which makes this type of strategy inappropriate for obtaining excellence in
a multitude of higher education systems, and increasing convergence within EU.
Regarding the low-cost strategy, this goes very well with standardized products with a
minimal level of differentiation, where quality is not the issue. Recommended for cases of
operational efficiency, experience curve exploitation, unbeatable supply chain or
redesigning the products, we consider this type of strategy also inappropriate for the
Bologna objectives.
The last resort - the differentiation strategy - is, in general, used by organizations that are
focused on personalized products, willing to invest in market research, understanding
customer preferences, continuous innovation, knowledge dissemination and establishing
good practices. We find this to be a perfect fit to the goals of achieving excellence in higher
education, either in universities, or national/European education systems.
way the strategy is applied is of tremendous importance for achieving the respective goals.
Consequently, the differentiation strategy allows for the possibility of personalizing the
strategic measures, function of the particular socioeconomic conditions, leading to a better
understanding of the market, and also to the increase of the own competitive advantage.

Figure 2: Achieving sustainable convergence
Source: authors’ own design

Summing up, we choose the differentiation strategy, keeping in mind that the element
leading to excellence and sustainable convergence is the particular application of the higher
education process to the requirements of the respective labour market (Figure 2).
The challenge is to align the differentiation strategy to a conceptual model, such that the
Bologna objectives of excellence and sustainable convergence are achieved. This is the
main goal of this paper: designing the excellence model which, implemented via the
differentiation strategy, leads to sustainable convergence of higher education within EU.

4. Research methodology
The research project Multivariate analysis of convergence in European Higher Education
developed between 2011 and 2014 a thorough analysis of the EU educational system at
macro and micro level and the convergence/divergence trends. According to the results
obtained, the mechanisms that determine convergence to certain extents were continuously
fuelled by the low homogeneity level manifested at EU level, by the weak link between
theory and practice, governance deficiencies or insufficient funding, and a whole plethora
of other factors.
The model developed by Dima et al. (2013) displays on a tree structure the main
dimensions of educational systems which are relevant for pursuing education convergence
quality assurance, and three relevant indicators for each dimension.
These concepts have been borrowed and analysed both as enablers and as results becoming
subsequently the variables of the excellence model that we are proposing.
Thus, we start from the underlying assumption that a model facilitates the understanding of
the interconnectivity between the elements of a complex system considering that the higher
education system is a complex adaptive system and we resorted to mapping the dynamic
relations that ensure the functioning of this system. We used system diagrams method
(Kim, 1993; Senge, 1999) also known as causal loop diagrams.

Figure 3: The real convergence model
Source: Dima et al., 2013

This method implies, beyond the identification of variables, the identification of causal
links among variables. A link of type O indicates a negative causality, which corresponds to
a negative correlated variation of the node values (initial versus receptor). On the other
hand, a link of type S corresponds to a positive causality (positive correlation).
Decelerating causal loops balance the system by restoring it to its initial state. Given the
negative feedback (the first and the last causality are opposite), the balancing loop
generates a self-limiting behaviour.

negative one, and they can determine either a flourishing or a decline period. Given their
positive feedback, this type of loops continuously enhance the distance between the initial
and the current state of the system, moving it away from the former and triggering a selfgenerating behaviour.
Through the causality type, we can identify the accelerating and decelerating causal loops
which depict behavioural system patterns. This identification comes in handy when we deal
with an imperious change within the system.
We therefore conceive the model of excellence for higher education under the name
ENCLOSURE (Excellence Model for Sustainable Higher Education), as introduced by
figure 4. The model is based on causal loop diagrams and Systems Theory, and takes as
variables the factors of influence displayed by Dima et al model. ENCLOSURE model
reflects the dynamic relationships that ensure not only the system functionality, but also the
achievement of excellence for each higher education unit, in their attempt to reach
sustainable convergence.
The aim of this model is not to give a precise structural representation of the higher
education unit functionality, but to represent the dynamic relationships which:
 Can ensure the coherence of the strategy of the respective institution;
 Can facilitate the achievement of excellence within the respective institution;
 Can lead to an education policy which is relevant for the socioeconomic and political
conditions in each particular country;
 Can stimulate excellence and hence convergence, at either macro (EU), or micro
(member country) level.
When applied correctly, ENCLOSURE enhances excellence attainment within each higher
education institution, implicitly leading to sustainable convergence of the European higher
education systems.

5. Results and discussions
The ENCLOSURE model considers the real involvement of the business environment of
utmost importance. We truly believe that signing/concluding partnerships between higher
education institutions and employers active on the labour market for refining the
knowledge, abilities and capabilities of the graduate (product/outcome of the first and
resource of the last) emerges as an important landmark of efficiency/effectiveness and
adequacy of higher education. To the extent to which the labour market requirements are
reflected in the university curricula, and the profile of the graduate in terms of soft and hard
skills, is the one agreed upon by the employer, convergence will only bring benefits.
Incentivising the private sector in the education process will also facilitate obtaining the
infrastructure necessary for the scientific-pedagogical endeavour (I22 in Figure 4), which,
on its turn will not only determine the enhancing of students’ satisfaction levels (I 21 in
Figure 4), but also the capacity of specific universities to attract/initiate, involve and/or
support international research grants (I23 in Figure 4).

The participation in important research projects, be them national or international, has the
capacity of amplifying the international visibility of the professors, individually, and of
their affiliated institutions (influence of I23 over I31, I32 and I33 in Figure 4). A similar
impact is exhibited by students’ satisfaction (I22) especially over the number of foreign
students registered by the higher education unit (I 31). As a result, the university in question
registers an increase of mobilities towards and from it. This fact further leads to a better
international visibility and nevertheless the multiplying of the agreed upon double degree
programmes (I32 ↔ I33 reciprocal/inter influence; I32 → I31 and I31→ I33 influences).
Cascading, the existence of double degree programmes will lead to a better recognition of
the graduates’ skills from higher education institutions, increasing their real chances of
entering the national or international labour market (I 33 → I41influence). In this manner the
student will conscientiously and considerably get involved in the educational process
(I21 →I42 and I41 → I42 influences), and, moreover the level of trust in professional
reconversion will rise (I41→I43 influence).

a rebound effect, increased employability by boosting students’ satisfaction levels (I 41
→I21) in contrast with the effect of a diligent lobbying activity for reflecting reality (I 41
→I13), followed also by the chain reactions attached to one decision or another.
Consequently, in a fundamental manner, if there is a real collaboration between the higher
education institutions and the private sector, the profile of the graduates will match the
needs of the employer to a large extent, so their employability is higher. This case leads to
the employers’ perspectives being thoroughly considered and taken into consideration in
the governance dimension. Additionally, the private sector will get encouraged to
participate in financing and supporting higher education institutions (I 13 → I2 influence)
and the programmes will be better designed as to address the needs of all the actors on the
labour market (I13 → I11 and I13 →I12 influences).
As it has been described, all the influences are positive, meaning of S type. Consequently,
both ending nodes fluctuate in the same direction. This ultimately results in a continuous
enlargement of the distance between the initial and the current state of the system,
removing it from the former and triggering a self-generating behaviour. In other words the
public-private partnership as part of ENCLOSURE model not only that is suitable for the
proposed strategy, but it also triggers and maintains it. No matter the interest diversity
claimed as main drawback, the business environment involvement acts as a catalyst for
students’ relevant knowledge acquisition and handling, graduates’ insertion on the labour
market of the originating country, retention of young researchers liable to pursue doctoral
studies and/or gain international recognition, and even more upstream, on the professors’
motivation level.
As it can be observed, the elements that can bring about the change falls within policies and
governance, and not strictly within funding, which is an effect and not the most important
determining factor (see the purple dotted arrow between I1. and I2. in Figure 4). To the
extent to which the governance practice favours the chain of interdependencies presented in
the model, the effects are the ones described. Otherwise, the course can be obstructed, all
the measures being undertaken only on a short term or meant to remedy an arising problem.
Realistically, the most important obstacle is the reduced degree of homogeneity found
within the clusters, mainly in the candidates’ cluster. Here, even in the favourable situation
in which the governance is adequately regulated, the differences in the economic welfare
being too large, even an ideal course of the causalities can lead to obtaining different results
and consequently, to an unaltered heterogeneity of the cluster.

Conclusions
Reaching sustainable alignment and convergence in EU higher education takes time and
concerted efforts. Achieving excellence within each and every higher education unit takes
also strategic thinking at their very own level.
Despite the general adhesion in pursuing these goals, it still is a process full of obstacles,
firstly because of the different status of national economies, secondly, because of the
cultural disparity that lingers across Europe, and not least the persistence in malfunctions
treatment instead of comprehensive analysis and actions.

top bottom approach (starting with the management policies of the higher education units),
while the Ministry of Education reacts by requiring a better and more efficient
internationalisation, as well as a better targeted quality management of the higher education
units. The bone of contention among the two approaches still remains – the funding.
ENCLOSURE represents the result of mapping and modelling a possible dynamics of the
higher education system. Used in corroboration with a differentiation strategy, it can yield
an efficient tool for solving the funding problem, of achieving excellence (within higher
education institutions) and also of obtaining sustainable convergence (at the EU level). The
implementation of the model provides each higher education institution the possibility of
customizing strategic measures conjointly with the freedom of focusing on the core of its
competitive advantage. The strength of the differentiation strategy – ENCLOSURE model
dyad consists in fostering the cultural-economic diversity and the enabling of authentic
excellence.
However, achieving excellence and sustainable convergence is not implicit. The balance
between diversity and standardization is not easy to attain, due to the interdependencies
between the model components, and their continuous evolution.


