Introduction

1.1

The transition to clean energy is accelerating

The global transition to clean energy has accelerated markedly over the past decade. Renewable
energy capacities have more than doubled over the past ten years and represented 70 percent of
net capacity additions in the power sector in 2017 (REN21, 2018). Renewables now represent
an estimated 26.5 percent of power generation globally. Correspondingly, renewables now
dominate expenditures in the electricity sector. In 2017, investment in renewable power
generation stood at USD 298 billion, representing two thirds of investments in power generation
(OECD/IEA, 2018).
This acceleration of deployment has come hand in hand with rapid reductions in the cost of
renewable energy technologies. According to the IEA, recent auctions have generated bids for
onshore wind and solar photovoltaics with prices between USD 20 and USD 50 per megawatt
hour (MWh). 1 Further price reductions are expected for wind, solar photovoltaics as well as
other technologies, like concentrated solar power, offshore wind and geothermal power. In
many regional contexts, this will bring prices for renewable electricity consistently below those
for fossil-based power (IRENA, 2018a).
Moreover, the global energy transition promises important social and economic
development opportunities (see Figure 1). Worldwide, more than 10 million people are already
employed in the renewable energy sector (IRENA, 2018b). In India, clean energy targets are
expected to create over 300,000 jobs in the next five years (CEEW and NRDC, 2017). A recent
report on South Africa shows that by pursuing ambitious renewable energy scenarios, gross
employment in the power sector could be more than doubled by 2030 (IASS and CSIR, 2019).
Studies also point out the significant health benefits related to renewable energy. Doubling the
share of renewables in the global energy mix could save up to 4 million lives annually by
reducing outdoor air pollution (IRENA, 2018b, 2016a).

1.2

The role of international cooperation to promote a global energy transition

Mirroring these trends, international cooperation to support a global energy transition is on the
rise. The international institutional architecture has developed significantly over the past decade.
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), founded in 2009, provides an
institutionalised and internationally recognised forum for global knowledge development and
exchange on renewable energy. In 2011, UN General Secretary Ban Ki-moon launched the UN
Initiative Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL). It provides a framework for activities in
support of implementing the Sustainable Development Goal 7 for affordable and clean energy.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) now also engages actively to support a transition to clean energy with initiatives like its Clean Energy Transitions Programme. Other important
initiatives include the Clean Energy Ministerial, the G20 Energy Transitions Working Group,
the International Partnership for Energy Efficiency and the Berlin Energy Transition Dialogue.
Initiatives and venues for multilateral cooperation are complemented by growing bilateral
engagement to foster international lesson-drawing and exchange. Germany, for instance, has
forged energy partnerships and dialogues with over 20 countries with the aim of promoting
renewables and energy efficiency (Quitzow et al. 2019). The EU and a number of its member
countries, such as Denmark, also hold clean energy dialogues with a range of countries. China
and the US collaborate in the context of the US-China Clean Energy Research Center.
Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) in the energy sector is increasingly being directed
to renewable energy sources. Data provided by the OECD on ODA reveals that support to
renewable energy projects grew substantially over the past decade (see Figure 2 for details). It
increased from slightly over USD 1.5 billion in 2008 to close to USD 6 billion in 2017. In 2017,
support for renewables made up 41 percent of total energy ODA, compared to 18 percent in
2008. Starting at similar levels in 2008, the share of fossil-based ODA has remained more
stable. Despite a substantial increase in total spending in the period from 2011 to 2015
compared to the period 2008 to 2010, it has lost substantial ground to shares dedicated to renewables. After peaking at a share of 26 percent in 2011, it has seen a downward trend since
then, declining to less than USD 1 billion, or 6 percent of total energy-related ODA, in 2017.


Despite the dynamic and positive development towards more international cooperation for a
global energy transition, it is widely acknowledged that investment towards achieving SDG7 on
clean and affordable energy is insufficient. A recent report by SE4ALL on 20 high-impact
countries estimates their overall annual investments (from private and public sources) in support
of SDG7 at USD 30 billion. This is well below the USD 52 billion that would be needed in
those countries (SE4ALL and Climate Policy Initiative, 2018).

2.1

Investment and employment concentrated in frontrunner countries

Moreover, investment in clean energy remains heavily concentrated in a small number of
frontrunner countries. China, the US and Europe accounted for three quarters of total global
investment in renewable energy in 2017 (see Figure 3 below). Among developing countries, India and Brazil represent the largest recipients, capturing 6 percent of the total. A mere USD 33
billion, representing 11 percent of the total, found their way into the remaining developing
countries (Frankfurt School-UNEP and BNEF, 2019). Among developing countries, India and
Brazil represent the largest recipients, capturing 6 percent of the total.
Manufacturing and employment creation in the clean energy sector, including renewable
energy generation and storage technologies, shows a similar picture. Globally, clean energy
manufacturing is dominated by China, Japan, Germany and the US. Brazil and India represent
important regional hubs in the wind energy sector, while Japan, Taiwan and South Korea
represent important players in various segments of the solar photovoltaics supply chain
(CEMAC, 2017). This is also reflected in the global distribution of jobs in the renewable energy
sector. China is the clear leader, accounting for 44 percent of employment. It is followed by the
European Union, which accounts for fourteen percent of global employment. Of this, about a
quarter is located in Germany. Brazil and the US each represent approximately ten percent of
the total number of jobs (IRENA, 2018b).

2.2

Investing in a low-carbon future?

In contrast to some of these frontrunners, in 20 SE4ALL high-impact countries investment in
fossil-based infrastructure still dominates (SE4ALL and Climate Policy Initiative, 2018).
Official ODA funding for fossil-based infrastructure shows a recent downward trend with
commitments in 2017 dropping below USD 1 billion. However, funding from public exportcredit agencies remains strongly oriented towards fossil-based energy supply, including coal.

Despite an agreement among OECD countries to reduce coal-related financing, a number of
banks continue to pursue investments in the coal sector. In the period from 2013 to 2015,
export-credit agencies provided an average of USD 38 billion in export financing for
investments in fossil-fuels, including over USD 5 billion for coal-based power plants. The
Japanese Bank for International Cooperation and the Export-Import Bank for Korea have been
found to be particularly active in launching new coal-based projects (DeAngelis, 2018). But
Germany’s export-credit agency, Euler Hermes, also continues to provide guarantees to fossilbased projects on a significant scale (see Figure 4). In 2017, 44 percent of financing went to
fossil-based technologies, including 10 percent to coal-based projects. In 2018, fossil-based
projects accounted for 28 percent of the total.
In addition, China Development Bank and China Export-Import Bank have become major
funding sources for coal- and other fossil-based energy supply around the world. Between 2005
and 2017, the two Chinese policy banks dedicated over 40 percent of their power sector funding
to coal-based energy supply. This is particularly significant given the increasing volumes of
finance that these Chinese banks provide. Their energy sector financing amounted to close to
USD 200 billion in the period from 2007 to 2016, almost twice as much as the World Bank
provides to projects in the energy sector (Gallagher et al. 2018).
These investments are supporting the creation of new, high carbon infrastructure lock-ins in
these countries. Many developing countries face massive investment needs in power generation
capacity in the near future. If these trends continue, this will lead to severe lock-in effects, endangering international climate targets or leading to stranded assets (Pfeiffer et al., 2016). It is
estimated that in the absence of additional climate policy measures, Africa’s emissions will
increase seven to fifteen times by 2100, accounting for 3–23% of global emissions by that time
(Calvin et al., 2016; Lucas et al., 2015).

2.3

The missed opportunities of low-carbon innovation in developing countries

In addition, existing clean energy investments still primarily target grid-connected electricity
generation pioneered in OECD countries. Despite their proven ability to provide rapid and
affordable access to clean energy in many country contexts, off-grid technologies account for
only 1.3 percent of investments (SE4ALL and Climate Policy Initiative, 2018; see Box 1 for a
discussion on the potential of off-grid and mini-grid technologies for rural electrification).
These investment trends are largely mirrored in the current landscape of international
cooperation. Overall, international cooperation is strongly focused on the promotion of existing
technologies and solutions. A recent review of Germany’s energy partnerships conducted by the
IASS shows that its bilateral cooperation primarily focuses on disseminating the lessons and
technical know-how from Germany’s energy transition to its partner countries. Accordingly, a
major focus is on the deployment of grid-connected renewable energy technologies and related
regulatory issues. Only in a few instances do the partnerships explicitly target the promotion of
innovation and technology development (Quitzow et al., 2019).
Box 1: The potential of off-grid and mini-grid technologies for rural electrification
The population receiving its power supply through off-grid and mini-grid systems has grown rapidly in
recent years. It has increased from approximately 20 million in 2011 to 133 million only five years later
(IRENA, 2019a). This has been driven not only by declining technology costs, but also by increasing
rural connectivity and the related expansion of consumer finance (Dalberg Advisors and Lighting Global,
2018). At the same time, grid-based rural electrification continues to be hampered by a number of
problems. In particular in Sub-Saharan Africa, uptake by newly connected households is frequently low,
caused by high connection costs and low quality of service. This in turn increases the related financial
challenges, eroding the willingness of utilities to increase the slow pace of grid extension in many
countries (Bos et al., 2018). Finally, a recent study by the IFC points out the high financial and
environmental costs caused by the wide-spread use of diesel-based back-up generators, a response to
unreliable grid supply. In Sub-Saharan Africa, they contribute an estimated 9 percent of total power
consumption (IFC, 2019). Against this background, off-grid and mini-grid technologies based on
renewable energy technologies offer viable alternatives to traditional electrification programs based on
grid-extension. Cost-effectiveness depends on the specific local context and needs to be assessed on a
case-by-case basis. Emerging planning tools, which draw on the full spectrum of available technology
options (i.e. grid extension, mini-grid and stand-alone systems), can support the design of least-cost
electrification strategies that incorporate off-grid and mini-grid solutions alongside grid extension
(Kemausuor et al., 2014; Mentis et al., 2017; Mutanga et al. 2018).
International initiatives that do target innovation and technology development primarily
focus on cooperation among energy transition leaders. Initiatives like the US-China Clean
Energy Research Center (CERC) and Mission Innovation explicitly target international
cooperation for technology development and innovation in clean energy. With a budget of 400
million US Dollars over ten years, CERC, a public-private partnership, has provided funding for
collaborative R&D on advanced clean energy technologies involving Chinese and US
researchers. Mission Innovation represents a multilateral initiative, which seeks to engage the
public and private sector to increase investment in clean energy innovation. It supports crossborder partnerships to confront specified innovation challenges. Like CERC, it engages
primarily existing frontrunners, like China, the US, Japan, members of the European Union,
India and Brazil. Little attention is paid to the development of innovation partnerships, aimed at
developing new solutions or technological innovations aimed at less developed markets.
While the spread of existing clean energy technologies to new markets is crucial to
advancing the global energy transition, it risks squandering important potential for low-carbon
innovation in developing countries. Depending on existing infrastructure or the particular
climatic or societal context, existing technologies may not always be the most appropriate.
Energy efficient building designs, for instance, must take into account both local climatic
conditions and social practices (Pocock et al., 2016). The failure to address context-specific
needs and challenges may significantly slow down the transition to clean energy. For example,
the slow and unsustainable transition to cleaner cooking energy solutions and the failed
attempts to promote the diffusion of smart meters in Africa have been attributed to a lack of
attention to the practical needs and economic challenges of households and the social-cultural
dimensions of energy production and consumption practices (de Bercegol and Monstadt, 2018;
Fadaeenejad et al., 2014; Groves et al., 2017; Shove and Walker, 2014; Sovacool and Dworkin,
2015; van der Kroon et al., 2013). Yet, innovation aimed at the needs of emerging and
developing markets offers important opportunities for value creation. Estimates show that
approximately two-thirds of middle-class consumption is likely to be located in emerging and
developing economies by 2030 (Kharas, 2017). Accordingly, these markets represent important
growth markets for energy-related infrastructure and services.
So-called “market-creating” innovations (Mezue et al., 2015) provide a particularly promising opportunity for technology leapfrogging and value creation. Market-creating innovations
build on and combine existing technologies to transform previously inaccessible offerings into
products or services that are widely accessible to users. They offer new trajectories for
economic growth in developing countries with opportunities for new economic actors. The
mobile payment platform M-Pesa represents such an example. Developed by Safaricom, a
Kenyan mobile network operator, and the Commerical Bank of Africa, headquartered in Kenya,
M-Pesa spurred a revolution in financial inclusion. It enabled consumers to store value on the
SIM cards of their mobile phones, allowing them to access financial and banking services.
While the platform started as a vehicle for making local payments, it now offers a host of
additional financial services and has provided a platform for a broad range of innovations that
help link Kenyan consumers to the financial system. Deposit accounts, for instance, have
increased from 2,55million in 2005 (before the launch of M-Pesa in 2007) to 34 million in 2015.
This was primarily driven by M-Pesa enabled micro-accounts (Ndung’u, 2018).
Following this trend, market-creating innovations in the energy sector are beginning to
leverage and combine advances in the sector with other areas of innovation. For example, the
so-called pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) market in solar home systems and solar-powered appliances
combines mobile payment technology with low-cost solar photovoltaics technologies to deliver
low-cost products to new customer groups. The market has grown from approximately 1 million
devices sold in 2010 to 25 million in 2017. There are now more than 300 companies active in
over 100 countries globally. Global investment in the sector reached close to USD 1 billion in
2017. More than 80 percent of the related investment was concentrated in Africa, while
headquarters are located predominantly in China (66 percent), Europe (12 percent) and Africa (9
percent) (Dalberg Advisors and Lighting Global, 2018). Moreover, a series of studies
implemented by GOGLA, the global association for the off-grid solar energy industry, have
shown that the off-grid solar energy market is beginning to generate significant new
employment opportunities. In 2018, markets for off-solar home systems in East Africa and
South Asia had estimated sales of 7.8 million and 21.9 million devices and generated an
estimated 75,000 and 260,000 jobs, respectively (GOGLA, 2019).
The ongoing revolution in information and communication technologies can represent a
critical enabler for further innovation and value creation in general and in the energy sector
specifically (Beliz et al., 2019). When combined with innovation in end-use sectors, like health
care, transport, or productive sectors, they provide opportunities for the creation of new
platforms for low-carbon development. Like traditional, grid-connected rural electrification
schemes, such energy solutions may not be economically viable in the absence of public
financial support. Due to their positive externalities for local value creation and employment,
they warrant greater attention from international donors.

2.4

Missing socio-economic data for enabling a just transition

Finally, numerous studies point out the multiple benefits of renewable energy and energy
efficiency (Helgenberger et al., 2019; Internationational Energy Agency, 2014; IRENA, 2016b).
However, this does not necessarily mean that support schemes are designed to maximize local
benefits and promote socio-economic progress, needed for just transitions. Moreover, in the
short to medium-term, transition processes may come with adverse and unequally distributed
socio-economic impacts. Understanding these socio-economic opportunities and challenges
processes is critical for building the support of populations as well as decision-makers in
affected countries (Rosemberg, 2017). Reform efforts across various policy fields have shown
that robust analysis of socio-economic implications can play an important role in enabling
policy action (World Bank, 2008, 2006, 2003). Conversely, without credible data on the
expected socio-economic impacts of policy reforms, policy action in support of energy
transition processes is likely to be cautious at best.
Regrettably, empirical data on the socio-economic impacts of the deployment of renewable
energy and other clean energy solutions in developing and emerging economies remains
relatively scarce (Jacob et al., 2015; Pahle et al., 2016). While IRENA has developed sophisticated methods for estimating the socio-economic impacts of renewable energy, their application
in developing and emerging countries remains fairly limited (IRENA, 2016b). The Global Tracking Framework for tracking progress towards SDG 7 on affordable and clean energy has
made important advances in measuring different levels of energy access (IEA et al., 2019). Yet,
it does not engage with the broader socio-economic implications of a transition to clean energy.
Moreover, there is little empirical data on the development of global clean energy industries and
their geographic distribution. This would be needed to help assess regional opportunities for
value creation within these emerging industries (IRENA, 2019b).
Regarding potential transition risks, the evolving debate on a Just Transition has spurred
efforts to identify and conceptualize the socio-economic costs, benefits and trade-offs of
policies aimed at decarbonizing the energy sector (Climate Strategies, 2018; Gambhir et al.,
2018; Jakob and Steckel, 2014; Marcu and Vangenechten, 2018; Newell and Mulvaney, 2013).
However, little systematic evidence has been collected on the socio-economic impacts at the
country-level in the Global South. One important exception is the work of the World Bank’s
Energy Sector Management Program (ESMAP) on the phasing-out of fossil fuel subsidies in a
series of developing and emerging economies. ESMAP’s Energy Subsidy Reform Technical
Assistance Facility 2 has supported the multi-dimension assessment of subsidy reform, covering
impacts on public finances, households, firms, the environment as well as the political economy
of reform. Its integrated approach to country-level assessment and reform development might
offer an important reference point for closing this important knowledge gap.

3

Advancing a global energy transition through more effective
international cooperation

The challenges and gaps outlined above provide the starting-point for the following
recommendations aimed at strengthening international cooperation in support of a global
transition to clean energy.

3.1

Promote investment in clean energy and end support for coal-based energy
infrastructure

International cooperation should focus on creating a conducive and enabling environment for
investment in renewable energy, while discouraging investment in fossil fuels. To this end,
donor countries from the OECD and G20 should lead the way by discontinuing all public
financial support for new coal-based energy infrastructure and by adopting guidelines for
investment in other fossil-based energy infrastructure. Coal-fired power plants are not only a
threat to globally agreed climate targets; by creating new lock-ins in high carbon infrastructure,
they also increase the economic and financial risk of stranded assets. Moreover, cost
competitive clean energy alternatives make the economic case for investments in coal-fired
power plants obsolete.

The OECD Sector Understanding on Export Credits for Coal-fired Electricity Generation
Projects offers an important starting point for developing an agreement among all donor
countries to discontinue their public financial support for coal-based energy infrastructure. It
includes, for instance, provisions to ensure that eligible projects are in line with the host
country’s climate mitigation strategy and that less carbon-intensive alternatives are not viable
(OECD, 2015). The G20 energy work stream would offer an appropriate forum for not only
extending the agreement to all G20 donor countries, but to extend its scope to all new coal-fired
power plants. In its 2016 Voluntary Action Plan on Renewable Energy, the G20 agreed in
principle on the need to reduce coal consumption. What is missing, however, is a clear
commitment of the G20 members to cease public financing for new coal-fired power plants
overseas.
Moreover, the G20 should call on all multilateral development banks (MDBs) to adopt
policies banning investments in coal-based energy supply. While the World Bank and a number
of other MDBs have done so, this should be extended to include the remaining MDBs. In order
to track the implementation of such commitments, a process for the development and
communication of corresponding policies should be established. The discontinuation of
financial support for coal-based power plants would not only ensure that MDBs avoid the
creation of new lock-ins in high carbon infrastructure, but would also set an important precedent
and framework for national development finance institutions (DFIs) to follow.
In parallel, the G20 energy and climate work streams should develop more general
guidelines for the provision of public financial support to investments in other fossil-based
infrastructure. This should be based on a life-cycle assessment of climate impacts and climate
asset risks. Such a framework should build on experiences with shadow carbon pricing as a
method for assessing carbon asset risk, as introduced by a number of MDBs (Larsen et al.,
2018; Bak et al. 2018). Again, the development of such a framework for use by G20 donor
countries and MDBs is not only important in its own right. It can provide guidance and the
political motivation for other DFIs to adopt corresponding approaches.

3.2

Promote evidence-based policy dialogue on the socio-economic dimension of
the global energy transition

As argued in Section 2.4 above, ambitious policy action in support of energy transition
processes will depend on credible strategies for the mobilization of socio-economic
opportunities. Equally important are effective measures for the mitigation of potentially adverse
impacts on local populations and stakeholders. International cooperation should play an active
role in developing such strategies and measures by supporting policy dialogue and robust
analysis of socio-economic benefits at both the country and global levels. At the country-level,
the COBENEFITS project, led by IASS in the framework of Germany’s International Climate
Initiative (IKI), offers in-depth assessments in a number of countries. Similar country-level
analyses are needed to underpin investment strategies in developing and emerging countries
around the world and should be expanded. In a first step, this might be done for the high-impact
countries within SE4ALL. Crucially, assessments should be developed in close cooperation with governments in the
affected countries. This way the ownership of the results can be enhanced, increasing the
likelihood that governments will take corresponding action. Moreover, such studies can provide
the basis for cross-country assessments of best practice and processes of mutual learning.
Formats for bi- or multilateral South-South policy dialogue, such as the International Solar
Alliance, also offer important venues for dialogue. China, but also India and Brazil, are the key
players in low carbon development outside the OECD and should be encouraged to take the lead
in creating such exchanges.
At the global level, socio-economic analyses conducted by IRENA, such as its recent report
on measuring the socio-economic footprint of the energy transition (IRENA, 2019b), offer an
important starting point. In particular, efforts should be made to conduct systematic data
collection on clean energy supply chains. The Clean Energy Manufacturing Center, launched by
the US Department of Energy, represents an important effort to generate data on clean energy
manufacturing for stakeholders in the US. These data are required for a robust assessment of the
factors, including international and national policies, regulations and standards, which are
shaping the localisation of industrial production within the emerging clean energy sector. Such
analysis is urgently needed to address the needs of developing and emerging economies. The
OECD’s Policy Dialogue on Global Value Chains, Production Transformation and Development could offer a forum for developing such a data collection initiative.
It is equally important to consider the potentially adverse effects that might accompany a
global energy transition both at the global and the country-level. To date, there is little
systematic analysis of the broader socio-economic risks of a global energy transition and the
related exposure of individual countries and stakeholder groups, in particular in the Global
South. Developing an evidence-base on these questions is crucial for the development of
appropriate mitigation strategies. This should include policy-based analysis along the lines of
the assessments conducted within the World Bank’s Energy Subsidy Reform Technical
Assistance Facility (see Section 2.4 above). Similar efforts should be made for a broader
spectrum of policies.

3.3

Provide early market support to promote challenge-based energy
innovation

As outlined above, there is an important need for energy innovation that targets the particular
needs of users in developing and emerging countries. At the same time, developing and
emerging economies frequently lack the institutional infrastructure necessary to support clean
energy innovation. This requires innovation eco-systems that span infrastructure and human
resources for research and development, financing for innovation and entrepreneurship as well
as networks of innovative firms. In addition to this, clean energy innovation typically requires
some form of support for early market demand for innovative products or services.
While the international community cannot provide a shortcut to the development of such
institutions, it could support international multi-stakeholder initiatives to jointly tackle selected
energy innovation challenges. Under the umbrella of SE4All or Mission Innovation, this could
provide a forum for bringing together cutting-edge international expertise with domestic knowledge and capacities to meet selected innovation challenges. The aim should be to
concentrate a critical mass of resources on a clearly defined innovation challenge, in order to
catalyse progress towards the chosen goal.
Within this context, efforts to foster early market demand for the resulting products or
services should play a central role. While feed-in tariffs or reverse auctions play this role in
stimulating markets for traditional, grid-connected renewable energy technologies, additional
instruments are needed to stimulate and aggregate demand in other areas of application. Market
support programmes for off-grid solar energy technologies and clean cooking solutions offer
examples of such approaches. These include support for the development of quality assurance
infrastructure, consumer awareness and support programs, financial and business support
services. Challenge-based innovation initiatives should prepare the ground for the roll-out of
additional market support programmes for innovative applications in new end-user markets.
Innovation-oriented procurement by the public sector offers an important entry-point for
stimulating such early market demand. This practice has successfully stimulated technologies
such as the Global Positioning System in the US or fuel cell electric buses in Japan. In
developing countries, there are examples in the health sector. So-called advanced market
commitments have been used to stimulate the development of vaccines in high-impact areas.
These legally-binding agreements provide funding to subsidise the purchase, at a pre-determined maximum price, of an as yet unavailable vaccine, accelerating its development and
availability.
Finally, the focus of innovation challenges should be developed in participatory processes,
involving not only the private sector but also civil society in the targeted countries or regions.
This would create opportunities to raise awareness and generate debate on energy innovation
within the respective countries, while identifying challenges that reflect domestic priorities and
needs. To do so effectively will also require strengthening the capacity of civil society
organizations to engage effectively in such processes. It has been found that the involvement of
civil society organizations in energy-related cooperation is very limited (Quitzow et al., 2016).
If equipped with the needed expertise, civil society can play an important role in identifying and
advocating for innovation in areas that address the needs of local populations.

4

Conclusion

Rapid declines in the costs for renewable energy technologies have unleashed an irreversible
process of transformation in the energy sector. Even the most conservative forecasts now project
a rapid expansion of renewable energy around the world. In order to meet climate and
sustainable development targets, however, there needs to be a parallel, rapid phase-out of fossil
fuels. Policy decisions thus remain crucial for determining the speed and success of a global
transition to clean energy. Cooperation among leading countries can play a key role in setting
the pace and promote a conducive framework in this regard. However, international energy
cooperation needs to go beyond the solutions and strategies being pioneered in these countries.
It will be equally important to address the unique challenges of developing and emerging
countries or run the risk of new lock-ins in high carbon growth path and unjust transitions.