
1. Introduction
The celebrated success of cooperatives in many countries around the world during the last
100–150 years has been accompanied by major challenges caused by secular changes in the institutional
environment for example, [1–3]. Symptoms of these challenges include but are not limited to, eroding
member commitment, deprived social capital, member apathy, lack of incentives to invest risk capital
in cooperatives, excessive agency and inﬂuence costs and so on [4–8]. Effective solutions to these
challenges are conspicuous by their absence, while the solutions that are currently on offer fail
primarily in view of the pervasive member preference heterogeneity problems for example, [9–11].
These problems are well known to cooperative scholars. Member preference heterogeneity was ﬁrst
introduced in the cooperative literature in the 1950s [12–14] in what was later titled the coalition school
of cooperative thought [15]. According to this theoretical approach, subgroups of members bargain
over key cooperative decisions whose outcomes were shown to depend on a number of member
characteristics. In subsequent decades, the issue of heterogeneity has attracted much interest from
scholars who adopted the lens of New Institutional Economics for example, [2,16–18] and pointed out
the linkage between heterogeneity and collective action problems [2,3,6,10,18].
This paper contends that, in many instances, member preference heterogeneity presents a
fundamental problem that cannot be solved by symptomatic solutions. To make this point,
we draw on systems theory and particularly on Luhmann’s distinction between part-whole and
system-environment paradigms. The ﬁrst sees a cooperative as a whole consisting of members as
parts; the key challenge is that members must reconcile their differences and exhibit commitment to
the collective good. The part- whole paradigm draws heavily on Aristotle’s metaphysics [19].
The system-environment paradigm sees the cooperative as a system located in a complex and
hostile environment, which includes members as well as other actors. It is inspired by Luhmann’s
placement of people outside social systems [20]. According to this approach, the key challenge is
to deﬁne and maintain the system-environment boundary. Heterogeneity problems indicate that
this boundary is not adequately deﬁned, so that cooperative sustainability problems ensue [6,21–25].
Redeﬁning the boundary is thus the fundamental solution; while tuning and adaptation within the
given/ﬁxed boundary present symptomatic solutions. We focus on agricultural cooperatives and thus
sector-related member heterogeneity may have a bearing on our ﬁndings and conclusions. Nonetheless,
member preference heterogeneity is not unique to agricultural cooperatives; we expect our conclusions
to be applicable to other sectors as well.
The literature on team performance suggests that different types of team diversity have
different effects on team performance for example, [26]. Thus, we adopt a neutral interpretation of
heterogeneity in preferences. Actually, we pose that member diversity may be interpreted as positive
heterogeneity. Consequently, cooperatives may design organizational arrangements that maximize
positive externalities related to diversity while minimizing the negative impacts of heterogeneity on
organizational performance [27].
We contribute to the literature on member preference heterogeneity in at least three ways:
(1) we synthesize a new systems-theoretic framework for analysing member preference heterogeneity
in cooperatives; (2) based on the aforementioned framework we distinguish between symptomatic and
fundamental solutions to challenges resulting from extreme heterogeneity; and (3) we suggest when
each solution type may or may not work and why. Our methodology includes a review of the extant
literature, a synthesis of the main elements of the system-environment approach and a meta-analysis
of case studies and other empirical research in order to highlight our theoretical arguments.
The paper is structured in seven sections. Section 2 introduces and discusses the part-whole and
system-environment paradigms in systems thinking and links their main propositions to the issue
of member heterogeneity. Section 3 brings these paradigms to bear on the heterogeneity issue while
Section 4 discusses the solutions suggested by the paradigms. The next section proffers examples from
cooperatives where symptomatic and fundamental solutions were implemented and discusses the
consequences. Section 6 draws implications for cooperative theory while Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. The Systems-Theoretic Framework
Systems theory offers an admittedly unusual perspective on cooperative scholarship.
On reﬂection, however, the ﬁeld of cooperative studies has been rife with systemic ideas if the
latter are understood to bear on the internal governance structures as well as on the place of
cooperatives in their outer socioeconomic environment. A recent example of systems thinking
applied speciﬁcally to agricultural cooperatives generated a string of studies adopting a “systems of
attributes” perspective [28–30]. This perspective stresses that the cooperative presents an emergent
whole shaping the functional signiﬁcance of its individual attributes, which are assumed to interact.
Thus, a change in the outer environment may have sweeping implications for the whole set of
attributes [28–30]. In a way, this perspective draws on both the part-whole and system-environment
paradigms mentioned above. Of particular interest to the present paper is the Luhmannian contribution
to the system-environment paradigm offering a counter-intuitive and encompassing interpretation of
the category of the environment. As will be explained in the following subsections, this interpretation
gives rise to a novel conceptual vision of the link between cooperative sustainability and the problem
of member heterogeneity.
2.1. The Part-Whole Paradigm
Niklas Luhmann, a luminary of the contemporary sociological thought, introduced a useful
distinction between two basic varieties of philosophical and interdisciplinary systems thinking:
the part-whole and system-environment paradigm. He associated the part-whole paradigm with
what he called the “Old European” philosophy and particularly with Aristotle who developed the
famous metaphysical postulate that the whole is more than the sum of its parts [31]. This postulate
has ontological and teleological dimensions. The ontological dimension implies that both the whole
and the parts are given as objective reality rather than present a contingent product of anyone’s
observation. The teleological dimension imputes to the whole an apparently supernatural causal
power that inﬂuences the development of the parts, which accordingly ﬁnd their purpose and meaning
in the whole. In sociological terms, the part-whole paradigm underpins the self-description of the
feudal stratiﬁcatory society that is separated into hierarchical classes, which in turn ensure the social
inclusion of individual persons as whole personalities. In brief, the part-whole paradigm sees the
key deﬁnitional attribute of systems in their wholeness which synthesizes and gives purpose to the
individual parts.
In the cooperative context, the wholeness translates into the vision of the collective good of the
members, which gives them the basis to be committed to their cooperative. Member commitment
is indeed commonly seen as the key or most decisive ingredient of organizational longevity for
example, [5,32–34]. It is usually deﬁned as “the preference of cooperative members to patronize
a cooperative even when the cooperative’s price or service is not as good as that provided by an
investor-owned ﬁrm” [33]. Crucially, commitment is needed to motivate members to face up to the
responsibilities associated with membership. Members, as owners of the business, must “organize,
incorporate, ﬁnance and elect directors to set the cooperative’s policy and govern” [35]. A recurring
discussion among cooperative scholars and practitioners centres on how cooperatives can maximize
members’ commitment to their organization for example, [32,36–39].
The problem of member heterogeneity poses a severe risk to member commitment. Member
heterogeneity has numerous dimensions, such as farm size and geographic dispersion, time horizons,
risk attitudes and perceptions, contractual relationship of each member to the cooperative, distribution
of honorary posts among members and products delivered to the cooperative [40]. Member
heterogeneity was found to intensify collective action problems, such as the free rider, horizon, portfolio
and collective decision-making constraints, by adding unproductive complexity [2,3,6,10,18]. While
such costs do not increase solely because of excessively high heterogeneity, it seems that heterogeneity
may critically accelerate the negative impact of these intra-organizational costs [41]. The cumulative
interaction between heterogeneity and collective action problems has indeed resulted in the erosion
of member commitment and social capital in agricultural cooperatives during the last decades for
example, [4,5,9]. It seems fair to say that many cooperative exits are explained, at least partially,
by complex cooperatives’ failure to respond to the needs of their highly heterogeneous memberships
for example, [9,42].
2.2. The System-Environment Paradigm
From a sociological point of view, Luhmann considered the part-whole paradigm to be
the systems-theoretic description of the feudal society based on the stratiﬁcatory principle of
social differentiation, whereas he took the modern society to be better described in terms of the
system-environment paradigm that he clearly favoured [43–45]. The premier sociological application
of the latter paradigm is functional differentiation, that is, the decomposition of the modern society into
function systems such as economy, law, politics and science [46,47]. Function systems do not include
any individual as a whole personality; rather, individuals participate in these systems through narrowly
deﬁned systemic roles. As whole personalities, individuals belong to the environment of social
systems. The relegation of individuals to the environment of social systems has brought Luhmann
charges of antihumanism, especially in view of his thesis that social systems are “operationally
closed” and thus largely indifferent toward their outer environment. Luhmann stressed, however,
that it is precisely through this indifference that social systems can withstand the environment whose
complexity inﬁnitely exceeds their own. A deﬁnitional feature of operational closure is that social
systems “produce not only their structures but also the elements of which they consist in the network
of these same elements. The elements [ . . . ] have no independent existence [. . . . ] They are not simply
connected. It is only in the system that they are produced” ([20], p. 32). A problematic implication of the
operational closure and the attendant imperfect sensitivity of social systems toward their environment
is the precariousness of system-environment relations which means that social systems potentially
run substantial sustainability risks [46]. Against this backdrop, Valentinov ([43], p. 14) identiﬁed the
central idea of the system-environment paradigm in the “complexity-sustainability trade-off,” which
“emerges because the growing systemic complexity entails the increasing risk that systems develop
insensitivity to those environmental conditions on which they critically depend.”
Paradoxically, the system-environment paradigm holds that the operationally closed systems
pursue the primary goal of self-reproduction “without any concern for the environment” ([44], p. 14].
A logical implication of this sort of self-reproduction is that it is likely to run up against the limits
of the environmental carrying capacity at some point. The ecological economics and sustainability
scholarship teach us that the system of world society is substantially overstraining the carrying capacity
of the natural environment already now [48]. According to the Living Planet Report 2014 issued by
World Wide Fund for Nature ([49], p. 9), the current global consumption of ecosystem services would
be sustainable if the Earth had been 1,5 times its current size. This is a telling illustration of the way
an operationally closed system (such as the world society) expands its self-reproduction beyond the
toleration limits of the environment. In fact, Luhmann ([20], p. 76) explicitly associated operational
closure with “degrees of freedom, which they [i.e., operationally closed systems] exploit as long as
possible; in other words, as long as the environment tolerates it . . . [T]he overall effect [of operational
closure] is not adaptation but greater deviation.” The tendencies of the expansion of the systemic
self-reproduction beyond the limits of the environmental carrying capacity are likewise characteristic
of function systems, such as the economy (in the form of the “‘externalization of costs’ through the
monetary economy” [20], the politics (in the form of the excessive politicization of social life cf. [50,51].
Just as the part-whole paradigm sees the key deﬁnitional attribute of systems in their wholeness,
the system-environment paradigm ﬁnds it in the system-environment distinction which is maintained
by systemic boundaries in such a way that human individuals turn out to be outside them. In the
cooperative context, the counter-intuitive implication of this distinction is the placement of members
as human individuals outside the boundaries of cooperatives if the latter are seen as Luhmannian
social systems. Just as individuals, according to the system-environment paradigm, participate in
social systems through their systemic roles rather than as whole personalities, so can membership be
thought of as a systemic role that by no means involves an inclusion of the whole personality. In the
organization theory literature, this conceptual standpoint is not unknown. It is implicit in Barnard’s
theory of organizational equilibrium [52] assuming that organizations offer inducements to individuals
populating their outer environment with a view to eliciting their membership contributions. In the
cooperative literature however, the understanding of membership as a systemic role stands in an
interesting contrast with Draheim’s thesis on the “double nature” of the cooperative enterprise [53]
cf. [11,54,55]. Whether or not this thesis is acceptable today, it underscores the practical difﬁculties of
keeping the membership as a systemic role clearly distinct from all other attributes that may pertain to
members as whole personalities, with many of these difﬁculties being reinforced by the proclamations
of the centrality of members to the cooperative business philosophy.
The relegation of members as whole personalities to the environment of cooperatives as social
systems sets the context in which cooperatives may suffer from the overexpansion scenario mentioned
in the preceding subsection. The key implication here is that the overexpansion may be directly induced
by the member heterogeneity problem. If the basic operation of cooperatives as social systems is the
“service to members” which corresponds to their common interest, then this interest indicates a limit
of the carrying capacity of the outer environment of cooperatives. If cooperatives were fully sensitive
to the environment, they would not expand their activity beyond the true range of common interests
of the members. Given that cooperatives present operationally closed systems, they do indulge in the
overexpansion of their activity. In the cooperative context, the overexpansion means that the range
of services delivered by cooperatives to their members go beyond the interests that the members
actually have in common. This overexpansion engenders the cooperative sustainability problems
that are usually associated with the fact of the substantial member heterogeneity. Thus, from the
systems-theoretic perspective, the parallels between the overexpansion of the cooperative operations
beyond the truly common interests of the members and the global overuse of the ecosystem services are
more than merely metaphoric. Both phenomena are manifestations of the “complexity-sustainability
trade-off” observed for different types of social systems.
3. Understanding the Member Heterogeneity Problem
3.1. Members as Part of the Environment of Cooperatives
The idea of operational closure implies that the unique identity of social systems is constituted
by the nature of their operations [55,56]. Just like other formal organizations, cooperatives present
operationally closed systems whose basic type of operation can be deﬁned as “service to members,”
with the understanding that this service corresponds to the common interest of the members.
The relegation of members as whole personalities to the environment of cooperatives means that this
environment includes the complexity of the multifarious lifeworld circumstances of these personalities.
The system-environment paradigm thus makes clear that any deﬁnition of the common interest
of members rests on unique and contingent constellations of these circumstances. Crucially, these
constellations are unstable. This is not only because of the necessary idiosyncrasies of personal histories
in the modern (as opposed to premodern) societies but also because the agrifood sectors, globally and
nationally, themselves exhibit salient trends which cannot but upset and disrupt the constellations of
lifeworld circumstances of the members. For example, the FAO 2017 Report on the future of food and
agriculture identiﬁes ﬁfteen of such trends [57], with the most important being population growth,
urbanization and ageing, global economic growth, increasing competition for natural resources, climate
change and the rise of agricultural productivity and innovation.
Just as other types of social systems, cooperatives can withstand the overwhelming complexity
of their environment if they develop sufﬁcient autonomy, which is in principle enabled by their
operationally closed character. The price of this autonomy is the possibility of the scenarios of the
“complexity-sustainability trade-off,” such as the overexpansion of cooperative operations relative to
the true range of the common interests of the membership base. In practical terms, various types of
cooperative stakeholders may induce the overexpansion. An interesting case speciﬁc to cooperatives
is when the members themselves induce the overexpansion. The economic reason for this sort of
overexpansion is that, in view of the heterogeneity of economic interests and life circumstances more
generally, some members may derive greater beneﬁt from particular cooperative services than other
members. But this is not the only reason. Service to members is known to be the hallmark of the
cooperative business philosophy. While the idea of member orientation correctly points out the
difference of cooperatives from investor-oriented ﬁrms, it fails to explicitly mention the commonness
of interests as the condition for cooperative sustainability. This condition can be taken account of
if the system-environment boundaries, that is, the boundaries separating the cooperative from the
environment, are subject to the continuous redeﬁnition in light of the evolving true range of the
common interests of the members.
3.2. Distinguishing Fundamental and Symptomatic Solutions to Member Heterogeneity
Elaborating the ecological economics implications of the system-environment paradigm,
Valentinov [45] offered a systems-theoretic interpretation of the economic concepts of relative and
absolute scarcities. Whereas the relative scarcity can be thought of as the intra-systemic observation
of the actual environmental conditions, the absolute scarcity speciﬁes the environmental conditions
that are essential for the survival of the system. This interpretation translates well into the proposed
distinction between the symptomatic and fundamental solutions. Absolute scarcity speciﬁes the range
of the truly common interests of cooperative members. Relative scarcity, in contrast, would refer to
member commitment and loyalty, which need to be maximized within the range of the truly common
interests but not outside it. Just as the price mechanism can deal effectively with the relative scarcity
but not with the absolute one cf. [58], so the member relations programs in cooperatives can improve
member commitment but cannot make member interests truly common. In the cooperative context,
this means that the absence of common interests is the fundamental problem that cannot be addressed
by symptomatic solutions.
Issues of relative scarcity are usually addressed by adaptation, that is, reactive, incremental
change. In the case of collective action, adaptation successfully addresses relative scarcity problems
when the Aristotelian postulate of 1 + 1 > 2, the keystone of the part-whole paradigm, holds. When,
however, the whole is less than the sum of its parts, which would be the case if member interests
were sufﬁciently heterogeneous, adaptation works only in the short run or does not work at all [10].
The usual remedy employed in dealing with heterogeneity issues in cooperatives is tinkering. Tinkering
does not change anything fundamental in the cooperative organization; through changes in bylaws
and operational policies the board attempts to soften the dissatisfaction of subgroups of members [41].
Therefore, tinkering represents a case of adaptation, that is, reactive, incremental changes that address
the symptoms of the heterogeneity problem.
Unsolvable problems can easily be interpreted as situations where the resources to untie them
are non-existent; such problems clearly imply absolute scarcity [45]. The notion of absolute scarcity is
conveniently related to the game-theoretic solution concept of the core. The latter, which highlights
the ‘1 + 1 < 2’ Aristotelian inequality, is the set of imputations under which no coalition has a value
greater than the sum of its members’ payoffs [59]. Therefore, no coalition (i.e., subgroup of members)
has an incentive to leave the grand coalition (i.e., the cooperative) and receive a larger payoff [59].
The standard properties of the core also are similar to those of absolute scarcity. According to the
Bondareva-Shapley theorem, the core of a game may be empty. Games with non-empty cores are called
balanced [59]. An empty core is exactly what absolute scarcity refers to in the context of cooperatives.
Assuming that an organization cannot move to a higher level from where to design and implement
a feasible solution, attempts to address an unsolvable problem might be a waste of organizational
resources. Even if the problem falls into the absolute scarcity type, however, a solution could be devised
at a different level. In order to do so, one needs to identify and address the root cause of the problem at
hand. Solutions that address the root causes of a problem are designated as fundamental solutions [60].
In the case of collective action, by implementing a fundamental solution the group is trying to move
into a new status where 1 + 1 >> 2.
Heterogeneity in member preferences potentially signiﬁes a case of both relative and absolute
scarcity. Up to a certain level and with respect to collective decisions that concern the short run,
heterogeneity can be ignored or even be used to improve the quality of decision-making outcomes [61].
In such circumstances, member preference heterogeneity can be considered as relative scarcity that
modiﬁcations in the ‘relative price structure’ can address. Signiﬁcant divergences in members’
preferences can arise due to judgmental and transactional differences, as well as differences in personal
circumstances [18]. Judgmental differences can have a historical background, reﬂect diverging logics
or, simply, be whimsical [18]. Transactional differences can result from signiﬁcant variation among
members in the nature of goods/products or services each obtains through the cooperative [18],
whereas personal circumstances will differ when members face conﬂicting incentives in dealing with
their cooperative as a result of differences in age, wealth, tax status, cash ﬂow, succession plans,
or mobility potential [10]. Such differences generate frictions and unproductive inﬂuence activities [6].
4. Solutions to the Member Heterogeneity Problem
4.1. The Part-Whole Paradigm Perspective
The Luhmannian distinction between the part-whole and system-environment paradigms can
thus be taken to suggest two broad practical strategies for dealing with the member heterogeneity
problem. The strategy following from the part-whole paradigm is the improvement of member
commitment, most prominently through the strategic use of member relations programs. This
strategy rests on the assumption that the economic interests of the members in the operations of
their cooperative are sufﬁciently common and any differences in member preferences are reconcilable
on the psychological level.
In fact, one of the most widely used solutions to the issue of member commitment is ‘member
retention’ [10] which refers to intra-organizational policies designed to increase members’ loyalty to the
cooperative [32,33]. Examples of such policies include “the introduction of member relations programs,
binding grower contracts, marketing agency in common exclusivity, investments in building and
promoting a cooperative’s image, training schools for members, the creation of high costs associated
with member exit and emphasis on the cooperative’s evolution and history. Sophisticated cooperative
education at the member and employee levels is observed to be important” ([10], pp. 22–23). Cases
of agricultural cooperatives that implemented this solution abound. For example, REO Veiling,
a Dutch auction cooperative for fruits and vegetables, provides additional services to its members
(e.g., collection of produce directly from each member’s farm) in an effort to glue farmer-members to
their organization [62].
The improvement of member loyalty will be an effective solution to the member heterogeneity
problem if the part-whole paradigm’s implicit assumption about the sufﬁcient commonness of member
interests is warranted. Whether this is the case is of course an empirical question. As Luhmann made
clear, the part-whole paradigm accentuates the emergent properties arising out of the interaction of
the parts but does not pay attention to the fact that the relevant whole may be a system sustaining a
precarious relation to the environment. If the lacking member loyalty is primarily due to the lack of
the underlying commonness of member interests, rather than to the psychological factors, then the
member-retaining solutions such as member relations programs will address only the symptoms of
the heterogeneity problem [10], while the underlying root cause would remain unaddressed. At the
same time, the adoption of symptomatic solutions creates an unintended side effect, namely, a further
increase in the organizational complexity that diminishes the cooperative’s ability to design and
implement the fundamental solution (not least because of highly scattered resources and undeveloped
capabilities). The following archetypical feedback loop diagram depicts exactly this situation (Figure 1).
The ﬁgure summarizes the organizational choice between symptomatic and fundamental solutions,
which correspond to the part-whole and system-environment paradigms, respectively. As member
commitment erodes (symptom), a cooperative designs and implements symptomatic solutions, such
as some member relations programs. However, as long as the root cause, that is, member preference
heterogeneity, is not addressed (fundamental solution), the problem persists and member commitment
may further erode for example, [38,60].
Figure 1. Solutions to member preference heterogeneity in agricultural cooperatives.
Figure 1. Solutions to member preference heterogeneity in agricultural cooperatives.

4.2. The System-Environment Paradigm Perspective
4.2. The System-Environment Paradigm Perspective
The negative side-effects of the symptomatic solutions suggested by the part-whole paradigm
The negative side-effects of the symptomatic solutions suggested by the part-whole paradigm may
may be avoided if the system-environment paradigm is employed to illuminate the precarious
be avoided if the system-environment paradigm is employed to illuminate the precarious nature of the
nature of the boundaries of the cooperative as a Luhmannian social system. As mentioned above, if
boundaries of the cooperative as a Luhmannian social system. As mentioned above, if the cooperative
the cooperative is indeed overstraining the carrying capacity of its outer environment which
is indeed overstraining the carrying capacity of its outer environment which includes its members, then
includes its members, then the system-environment paradigm recommends the redefinition of the
the system-environment paradigm recommends the redeﬁnition of the cooperative boundaries. This
cooperative boundaries. This will be the fundamental solution required in those cases when member
will be the fundamental solution required in those cases when member heterogeneity exceeds a certain
heterogeneity exceeds a certain level and thus results in fractions, frictions and extremely high
level and thus results in fractions, frictions and extremely high collective decision-making costs [10].
collective decision-making costs [10]. In such cases, the heterogeneity problem takes the form of
In such cases, the heterogeneity problem takes the form of absolute scarcity and asking current
absolute scarcity and asking current members to remain loyal to their cooperative sounds rather
members to remain loyal to their cooperative sounds rather ironic. What are the symptoms of such
ironic. What are the symptoms of such excessive heterogeneity that cooperative leaders can use as an
excessive heterogeneity that cooperative leaders can use as an alarming signal? The list of symptoms
alarming signal? The list of symptoms includes but is not limited to, a highly segmented, fragmented
includes but is not limited to, a highly segmented, fragmented membership, members’ rejection of
membership, members’ rejection of sound investments proposals, too few resources spread too
sound investments proposals, too few resources spread too thinly as a result of over-diversiﬁcation
thinly as a result of over-diversification (following subgroup member pressure), extremely low
(following subgroup member pressure), extremely low member commitment and so forth. While this
member commitment and so forth. While this is definitely not an exhaustive list of symptoms, it
is deﬁnitely not an exhaustive list of symptoms, it does provide an idea of what to expect in such cases.
does provide an idea of what to expect in such cases.
At the same time, it would be wrong to see the fundamental solution of the redrawing of the
At the same time, it would be wrong to see the fundamental solution of the redrawing of the
cooperative boundaries as a panacea. An essential qualiﬁcation is that the member heterogeneity
cooperative boundaries as a panacea. An essential qualification is that the member heterogeneity
problem presents just one dimension of the precariousness of system-environment relations that may
problem presents just one dimension of the precariousness of system-environment relations that
be relevant for cooperatives. It seems fair to say that cooperative governance tends to be more complex
may be relevant for cooperatives. It seems fair to say that cooperative governance tends to be more
than the governance of investor-owned ﬁrms for a number of reasons. For example, the one-member,
complex than the governance of investor-owned firms for a number of reasons. For example, the
one-vote principle may make collective decision-making challenging; members may face difﬁculties in
one-member, one-vote principle may make collective decision-making challenging; members may
aligning their investor and user roles; board members may not have the skills and knowledge required
face difficulties in aligning their investor and user roles; board members may not have the skills and
to exercise their duties appropriately; cooperatives have a diffused objective function formed by
knowledge required to exercise their duties appropriately; cooperatives have a diffused objective
bargaining between subgroups of members while investor-owned ﬁrms have a single objective; many
function formed by bargaining between subgroups of members while investor-owned firms have a
cooperatives are not listed in the stock market and thus lack a key means to monitor management
single objective; many cooperatives are not listed in the stock market and thus lack a key means to
efﬁciently. In broad systems-theoretic assessments of the non-proﬁt sector, Valentinov et al. [63] pointed
monitor management efficiently. In broad systems-theoretic assessments of the non-profit sector,
out that non-proﬁts are more likely to exhibit less technological competence than for-proﬁt corporations,
Valentinov et al. [63] pointed out that non-profits are more likely to exhibit less technological
with the consequence that the economic sustainability of the former tends to fall short of the economic
competence than for-profit corporations, with the consequence that the economic sustainability of
the former tends to fall short of the economic sustainability of the latter [64]. These assessments seem
sustainability of the latter [64]. These assessments seem applicable to cooperatives as well and
underscore the relative complexity of their internal governance in relation to the investor-owned ﬁrms.
It is worth noting that the possibility of the cooperative overexpansion scenarios along the
lines of the complexity-sustainability trade-off does not suggest that a perceptive and proactive
leadership cannot prevent these scenarios, at least partially. Even though the Luhmannian theory
is not deterministic, it does not rule out that the deliberate policy-making efforts may indeed make
cooperatives more sustainable. Cooperative leadership may mould the deﬁnition of the systemic
membership roles and may even appeal to members as whole personalities (placed in the environment
of cooperatives) to abstain from actions that pose sustainability risks for the cooperatives. Exploring
the case of non-proﬁt membership associations, Valentinov and Larsen argued that if the heterogeneity
of the membership base is rising, the associations might be most effective if they opt for the narrower
deﬁnitions of their mission statements [65]. A similar argument may be applicable to cooperatives that
may mould the deﬁnition of the systemic membership roles accordingly. Members may contribute
to this deﬁnition but their contributions will be likely most productive if their interests are mutually
compatible, that is, common. Generally, identifying the boundaries of a particular cooperative
necessitates us answering three questions, that is, who owns the cooperative, who controls the
cooperative and who beneﬁts from the cooperative? Redeﬁning the boundaries of a cooperative
implies providing different answers to one or more of these questions.
The extant literature is full of cases of cooperatives that failed to diagnose excessive heterogeneity
as the root cause of other issues and/or did not realize its absolute scarcity nature in order to redesign
cooperative boundaries. The next section presents some of these examples.
5. Examples
There exist numerous examples from the cooperative world where the system-environment
boundary is either not clearly deﬁned or leads to a completely new relationship of member-patrons to
their cooperative. We have categorized our examples based on whether (1) they have been successful
or not; and (2) they represent a case of adaptation (constitutional or operational) or redrawing of
boundaries. Constitutional adaptation means the cooperative amends its bylaws or other ofﬁcial
documents to keep a subgroup of members happy, whereas operational adaptation means that the
cooperative changes its operation in some way so as to relieve pressures and avoid serious friction.
The redrawing of boundaries includes three cases: a redeﬁning of residual income rights, residual
control rights, or culture/purpose of the cooperative organization. This section highlights ten of these
examples (Table 1).
Table 1. Examples of adaptation and boundary redrawing to address member preference heterogeneity in selected agricultural cooperatives.
Tinkering

Redrawing Boundaries

Constitutional

Operational

Successful

Friesland-Campina (NL)
[10]; REO Veiling (NL)
[10]; Morakert (HU) [10];
Florida’s Natural (USA)
[10]; Organic Valley (USA)
[10,66]; Pindos Poultry
Co-op (GR) [67]; CRS (CA)
[68]; CBH (AU) [22];
Pro-Fac Cooperative
(USA) [69]; United
Producers, Inc. (USA) [70]

CRV (NL) [10]; REO Veiling
(NL) [10]; Morakert (HU) [10];
Land O’ Lakes (USA) [10];
Dairy Farmers of America
(USA) [10]; Blue Diamond
(USA) [10,71]; Growmark
(USA) [10]; Pindos Poultry
Co-op (GR) [67]; Pro-Fac
Cooperative (USA) [69];
North; American Bison
Cooperative (USA, CA) [72]

Unsuccessful

Berkeley Co-op (USA)
[75]; Co-op AG (DE) [6];
California Pear
Bargaining Association
(USA) [76]; Rice Growers
Association (USA) [77]

Berkeley Co-op (USA) [75];
Co-op AG (DE) [6]; ABB
Grain (AU) [22]; Dairygold
Co-operative Society Limited
(IE) [74]

Redeﬁning Residual Control Rights

Redeﬁning Purpose and/or
Culture

American Crystal (USA) [10];
Organic Valley-CROPP (USA) [10];
Dakota Growers Pasta Company
(USA) [73]; Glanbia (IE) [74]

American Crystal (USA) [10];
Organic Valley-CROPP (USA) [10];
Dakota Growers Pasta Company
(USA) [73]

Organic Valley-CROPP (USA)
[10]; Pindos Poultry Co-op
(GR) [67]

Farmland (USA) [10]; Saskatchewan
Wheat Pool (CA) [78]; Tri Valley
Growers Cooperative (USA) [79];
Diamond Walnut Growers (USA)
[71]; Cebeco (NL) [42]; Challenge
Dairy Cooperative (AU) [80];
Newmarket Co-operative Creameries
Limited (IE) [74]

From Farmers (NL) [10]; Farmland
(USA) [10]; Saskatchewan Wheat
Pool (CA) [78]; Tri Valley Growers
Cooperative (USA) [79]; Diamond
Walnut Growers (USA) [71];
Cebeco (NL) [42]; Challenge Dairy
Cooperative (AU) [80]; Kerry
Group PLC (IE) [74]

Tri Valley Growers
Cooperative (USA) [79];
Diamond Walnut Growers
(USA) [71]; Cebeco (NL) [42];
Agricore United (CA) [81]

5.1. Successful Constitutional Adaptation: Organic Valley-CROPP (USA)
5.1. Successful Constitutional Adaptation: Organic Valley-CROPP (USA)
Organic Valley is aa centralized, multiple-pool, primarily organic dairy cooperative based inin
Organic Valley is centralized, multiple-pool, primarily organic dairy cooperative based La
La Farge, Wisconsin, USA. Thecooperative was founded in 1988 by a group of local producers who
Farge, Wisconsin, USA. The cooperative was founded in 1988 by a group of local producers who
aspired toto simultaneously deliver a stable producer price an economically sustainable familyfamily
aspired simultaneously deliver a stable producer price and and an economically sustainable farm
style tostyle to member suppliers [66]. From nothing but has now become now become a complex
farm member suppliers [66]. From nothing but a dream it a dream it has a complex international
cooperative with a highly diverse,highly diverse, heterogeneous membership (Figure 2).
international cooperative with a heterogeneous membership (Figure 2).

2017

1988
1980s
Hardship
for U.S.
farmers

1987
7 farmers,
LaFarge,
Wisconsin

Coulee
Region
Organic
Producer
Pool
(CROPP)

1990
Organic
Valley

2002
Branded +
Private
Label +
Bulk

> 500
products
$ 1.1
Billion
Gross Sales

Figure Time line of organic valley’s evolution.
Figure 2.2. Time line of organic valley’s evolution.

Organic Valley is the largest organic cooperative in North America, one of two national buyers
Organic Valley is the largest organic cooperative in North America, one of two national buyers of
of organic milk and one of two national organic dairy manufacturers. The cooperative is organized
organic milk and one of two national organic dairy manufacturers. The cooperative is organized as a
as a new generation cooperative, owned and controlled by patron-members who also transact with
new generation cooperative, owned and controlled by patron-members who also transact with the
the business. It has 2044 family farms as members scattered in 35 U.S. States, Canada, Australia and
business. It has 2044 family farms as members scattered in 35 U.S. States, Canada, Australia and the
the UK. In addition to organic milk, these members deliver to their cooperative eggs, soybeans, beef,
UK. In addition to organic milk, these members deliver to their cooperative eggs, soybeans, beef, pork,
pork, poultry and other organic produce. In 2017 Organic Valley’s CEO reported to the
poultry and other organic produce. In 2017 Organic Valley’s CEO reported to the seven-member Board
seven-member Board of Directors, gross sales of $1.1 billion, up 4.2 percent from 2016-an all-time
of Directors, gross sales of $1.1 billion, up 4.2 percent from 2016-an all-time high for the cooperative [82].
high for the cooperative [82]. In order to address the negative impact of a highly heterogeneous
In order to address the negative impact of a highly heterogeneous membership on members (e.g., cross
membership on members (e.g., cross pool subsidization), since its inception in 1988, the cooperative
pool subsidization), since its inception in 1988, the cooperative has constantly adapted its bylaws.
has constantly adapted its bylaws. More specifically, Organic Valley has adopted a defined
More speciﬁcally, Organic Valley has adopted a deﬁned membership policy and very strict member
membership policy and very strict member constraints [10]. The first refers to the cooperative’s
constraints [10]. The ﬁrst refers to the cooperative’s decision to accept new members only after new
decision to accept new members only after new markets have been secured. The latter signify the
markets have been secured. The latter signify the mandatory delivery of 100% of members’ milk to the
mandatory delivery of 100% of members’ milk to the cooperative and the strict, enforceable
cooperative and the strict, enforceable termination clauses, in case a member does not adhere to the
termination clauses, in case a member does not adhere to the rules or delivers a quality different
rules or delivers a quality different from that speciﬁed in the member agreement. Such constitutional
from that specified in the member agreement. Such constitutional adaptation ensures that all
adaptation ensures that all members contribute to the success of the cooperative organization.
members contribute to the success of the cooperative organization.

5.2. Successful Operational Adaptation: CRV (NL)
5.2. Successful Operational Adaptation: CRV (NL)
Established in 1874, CRV is a federated cattle improvement cooperative based in Arnhem,
Established in 1874, CRV is a federated cattle improvement cooperative (Belgium). It brings
The Netherlands, owned by cooperatives CR Delta (the Netherlands) and VRVbased in Arnhem, the
Netherlands, owned by cooperatives CR Delta (the Netherlands) in Belgium(Belgium). 2016–17,
together 20,000 members in the Netherlands and 6000 members and VRV [83]. In It brings
together 20,000 members in €171.9 million and distributed member Belgium [83]. In 2016–17, the
the cooperative had net sales ofthe Netherlands and 6000 members individends of €4.1 million. CRV
iscooperative top-three internationalmillion and cattle improvement with ofﬁces in themillion. CRV is
one of the had net sales of €171.9 players in distributed member dividends of €4.1 Netherlands,
one of the top-three international players in cattle improvement with offices in the Netherlands,

Flanders in Belgium, Germany, Czech Republic, UK, Spain, New Zealand, South Africa, Brazil, USA
and Canada, while it exports to more than 50 other countries [83].
The more than 26,000 members of CRV, scattered in two countries posed pressing member
commitment issues arising from this highly heterogeneous membership base. To address these
issues, CRV adapted operationally by creating member-retaining idiosyncratic value; it established
a strong member relations department and hired a skilful communications expert [10]. Further,
on 17 January 2017, the cooperative CR Delta (the Netherlands) and the VRV association (Flanders)
merged to create a single cooperative, Royal Cooperative CRV u.a. This operational adaptation
seems to represent yet another attempt to boost member commitment in a cooperative with such a
heterogeneous membership [83].
5.3. Successful Redeﬁning of Residual Income Rights: Dairy Farmers of America (USA)
Dairy Farmers of America (DFA) is a U.S. milk marketing cooperative owned more than 14,500
dairy farmer-members in 48 states. In addition to marketing members’ raw milk, DFA sells milk and
derivative products to wholesale buyers both domestically and globally [84]. DFA was formed in
1998 through the merger of four dairy cooperatives: The Southern Region Associated Milk Producers
Inc., Mid-America Dairymen Inc., Milk Marketing Inc. and Western Dairymen Cooperative Inc.
In the ensuing years ﬁve more cooperatives joined DFA. Since 2017 the cooperative’s headquarters
are in Kansas City, Kansas [84]. In 2017, net sales rose to $14.7 billion, while net income was
$127.4 million [84].
Balancing the needs and preferences of such a diverse membership requires much more than
offering the best milk price to members. Through its base capital plan DFA has managed to control
member heterogeneity by aligning residual ownership rights and patronage, so that ownership
is always and proportionally, in the hands of those members who contribute to the cooperative
business [10]. A base capital plan is:
“An effective ﬁnancial management tool for cooperatives to use in achieving the appropriate level of
equity, not only to capitalize the business but also to balance member investment to make it proportional
to use. Through the systematic collection and repayment of member investment, a base capital plan
provides a method for managing a cooperative’s equity capital levels. By doing so, a member’s
investment in the cooperative is maintained in proportion to use, supporting the user-ﬁnanced
principle in the cooperative. Another principle, user-control, is also fulﬁlled”. [85]
Given the complexity of implementing a sound base capital plan, DFA has also invested resources
in communicating the advantages of the tool for all members [85]. As a result of the implementation of
the base capital plan, higher member homogeneity is achieved [10].
5.4. Successful Redeﬁning of Residual Control Rights: Glanbia (IE)
Glanbia has its origins in the Irish cooperative movement that evolved over the last century.
Glanbia PLC was formed in 1997 out of the merger of Avonmore Foods PLC and Waterford Foods PLC.
Today In 2017, Glanbia was the largest dairy milk producer and dairy processor in Ireland, processing
6.7 billion litres of milk, operating 27 production facilities, with products sold in 130 countries and a
presence in 32 countries, including joint ventures, making €2.4 billion in revenues. In the same year
the cooperative-owned company celebrated its eighth consecutive year of double-digit growth. This
successful evolution has been the result of more than one forces working together simultaneously [86].
However, recent research suggests that a number of organizational changes, mainly in the form of
redeﬁning residual income rights, have been a major driving force [74]. Due to space limitations,
we present only a few of these changes but the interested reader is referred to the sources mentioned
in this example.
The expansion that the group initiated in 2012 to seize the opportunity presented by the 2015
abolition of EU milk quotas brought with it concerns of rising member preference heterogeneity,
primarily due to varying member preferences with respect to risk and ownership considerations [74].
The additional processing capacity needed in Ireland led to the establishment of a joint venture
between the cooperative (Glanbia Co-operative Society Limited, Kilkenny, Ireland) and the PLC
(Glanbia PLC, Kilkenny, Ireland). This joint venture acquired the Irish dairy ingredients assets of
the PLC and built a new dairy processing plant [74]. The cooperative owns 60% of the joint venture.
Additional capitalization of the new venture led to a reduced shareholding of the cooperative in the
PLC (now 41.4%). The latter reduced the cooperative’s debt burden but also “unburdened the PLC of
milk price pressures from either the cooperative or its supplier members” ([74], p. 73). While some
members were concerned about lost control of the joint venture, redeﬁning the ownership structure
has been deemed successful by 70% of members, probably because they recognized that there was less
need to own the PLC since the cooperative owns a majority shares in the joint venture [74].
5.5. Successful Redeﬁning of Purpose/Culture: Pindos Poultry Cooperative (GR)
Following the advice of the World Council of Churches, seven farmers in north-western Greece
founded the Pindos Poultry Cooperative (PPC) in 1957 [67]. Today the company is a member-investor
cooperative with vertical investments. It has adopted numerous organizational innovations over
the last 35 years that enabled PPC to become a key player in the fresh and processed poultry meat
industries in Greece, commanding a 37% market share. Among the key organizational changes the
cooperative has adopted are: a deﬁned membership policy, appreciable member shares, signiﬁcant
up-front equity capital investment, delivery rights and a well-designed, efﬁcient member relations
program [67]. However, none of these organizational changes would have been possible without a
major shift in corporate culture that was initiated in the late 1960s and was fully and consciously
adopted in the late 1970s.
In the late 1960s and up until 1978, grower-members of PPC gradually stopped assuming
managerial duties and refrained solely to governance duties. During the same period, the cooperative
bought tracks so that all transport and logistics functions were performed by wholly owned means.
In 1979 a critical incident in the life of PPC occurs; the environmental protection authorities of
Greece close the cooperative’s plants for violating environmental laws and regulations. In numerous
interviews with current and past PPC leaders, the common conclusion is that this was a critical point
in the organizational life of the cooperative. Cooperative leaders met many times with members and
after a short period of reﬂection, recognition and introspection, they collectively decided that the only
way forward was to become a fully professional and environmentally responsible company [ibid]. This
critical, bottom-up decision enabled PPC to implement key organizational changes and thrive in the
years since. Not only became an environmentally friendly business but it now proﬁts from the waste
of its plants that back in the 1970s led to the closing of PPC’s plants by the authorities. Further, this key
change in corporate culture enabled the cooperative to act as glue that puts together and synthesizes
the diverse and, potentially conﬂicting preferences of its now expanded membership [67].
5.6. Unsuccessful Constitutional Adaptation: South Australian Co-operative Bulk Handling (AU)
South Australian Co-operative Bulk Handling Ltd (SACBH) was an Australian cooperative
established in 1954 to perform bulk grain handling and storage operations on behalf of its
farmer-members [22]. In 2000 SACBH had 17,365 members with heterogeneous interests and
preferences. In that year the decision was made to demutualize and form a company known as
AusBulk-United Growers Holdings (AusBulk-UGH, Adelaide, Australia). In 2004 this company
merged with another formerly cooperative business, ABB Grain. The latter became Australia’s largest
agribusiness ﬁrm with over 16,300 members and a storage capacity of more than 4 million tonnes,
1100 employees and a highly diverse business portfolio and presence in numerous foreign markets [22].
Following its listing in the Australian Stock Exchange, in 2009 ABB Grain was acquired by VITERRA,
the largest Canadian grain handling company [22].
SACBH’s evolution into a non-cooperative business that primarily serves its investor-owners
rather than its member-patrons represents an interesting case of problematic constitutional adaptation.
It all started in 1989 when the cooperative implemented a change in its membership policies. Bylaws
were amended to allow membership to lapse if a member did not transact with the cooperative for more
than four consecutive years. Additional changes were made to the system of toll charges and provisions
in order to enhance transparency and block double voting by members. Signiﬁcant changes in the
institutional environment and relevant policies followed. The combination of these developments led
to a dramatic shift in member perceptions regarding what meant value creation within the cooperative.
According to Mazzarol et al., while members were concerned about the end impact of SACBH’s
demutualization on their farms and families, “they had been reassured that the corporate governance
of AusBulk-UGH would protect their level of ownership and control” ([22], p. 133). As should have
been expected, such promises were proved to be false.
5.7. Unsuccessful Operational Adaptation: Coop AG (DE)
German consumer cooperatives were developed in a pattern similar to the British Rochdale
model, spreading rapidly in German urban areas after 1890 [86]. Following WWII, German consumer
cooperatives were rebuilt and as soon as 1960 they had achieved sales of DM 3.2 billion and employed
80,000 people [6]. Coop AG was the largest consumer cooperative in West Germany. By 1988 it had
become the fourth-largest retailer with annual sales above DM 10 million [86]. Three years later,
however, the cooperative collapsed and its assets were sold to various competitors [6]. What caused
this catastrophe?
The extant analyses seem to converge on the role that member heterogeneity played in bringing
about this negative development for example, [6,86,87]. The cooperative’s successful evolution since
1974 attracted a large, heterogeneous membership with highly diverse preferences. As a result,
members were unable or unwilling to monitor management efﬁciently. Particularly during the last
years of its life cycle, Coop AG managers made numerous operational adaptations that either offered
too little in terms of organizational efﬁciency, or allowed them to advance their personal interests but
led to the demise of the cooperative [87,88]. Examples of these operational adaptations include the
formation of numerous subsidiaries, a mix of wholly owned and independent cooperative members
within an unconventional federated and, simultaneously centralized structure, overexpansion into
non-food markets with an extended store network, diversiﬁcation of retail activities and numerous
acquisitions of non-core-related businesses throughout Germany [87].
5.8. Unsuccessful Redeﬁning of Residual Income Rights: Diamond Walnut Growers (USA)
The California Walnut Marketing Association (CWMA) was formed in 1912 as a federation of
local walnut packing cooperatives. In 1956 the cooperative became centralized, was renamed as
Diamond Walnut Growers (DWG) and built processing facilities to expand its production of shelled
walnuts [83]. Following the implementation of its long-term strategic plan, by the late 1990s, DWG
had become a competitive supplier to U.S. grocery chains with a broad array of nut products. By the
mid-2000’s, DWG had 1735 members and a 38.5 percent market share in the culinary and in-shell nuts
industry. In 2005, however, DWG’s members agreed to convert the cooperative into a publicly traded
investor-owned ﬁrm. Only a couple of years after DWG’s conversion, 42 former members who have
signed marketing agreements with the ensuing investor-owned ﬁrm (IOF), Diamond Foods, thought
that they were being underpaid; they even considered ﬁling a lawsuit against the company [71]. What
led to this uninvited outcome?
Hardesty argues that the conversion represents the cooperative’s attempt to address the horizon,
free rider and principal-agent problem facing DWG during the years before the conversion to IOF [71].
The author suggests that high variance in board member age resulted in highly heterogeneous
preferences with respect to the proﬁt orientation. Due to the horizon issue, intensiﬁed by investment in
intangible assets, such as brand name equity, older members favoured the conversion as the only means
to capitalizing the value of DWG’s recent and anticipated investments in market development [71].
When these older members became a majority, they did vote for the conversion in 2005. The number
and heterogeneous preferences of members did not help in addressing the management-monitoring
problem either. These issues, however, could have been addressed by constitutional adaptation
(e.g., issuance of transferable and appreciable delivery rights) without the need to change the deﬁnition
or the allocation of residual income rights as a result of the conversion to an IOF.
5.9. Unsuccessful Redeﬁning of Residual Control Rights: CEBECO
The Royal Cebeco Groep had its origins in the late 19th century when Dutch farmers joined together
to address asymmetric information issues related to fertilizer quality through collective action [42].
Following the Raiffeisen tradition, the Central Bureau, which was established at that time, was
converted into a federated cooperative that purchased inputs for its member-cooperatives. After
WWI, it expanded into the trading of cereals and sale of seeds, while just before WWII it started its
own breeding company. The latter represented a major strategic move, as the cooperative invested,
for the ﬁrst time, in an activity other than trading. The post-WWII period, up to the late 1970s,
was characterized by continuous growth and expansion into unrelated industries, such as farm
building construction, meat, frozen poultry, potato processing and so forth. In some of these industries
Cebeco remained despite the losses it experienced for over a decade. It is characteristic that in
1965 the cooperative had stakes in 55 ﬁrms while at the end of the 1990s it had investments in
more than 100 companies. The 1980s brought an end to the post-war growth and led to a major
restructuring, particularly in the relationship between Cebeco and its member-cooperatives. Cebeco
became a holding company while members became directly involved in three, so called, participations
(seed, feed and food) that were managed on the basis of return on investment. Former departments
became subsidiaries with separate management and non-performing companies were closed or sold.
In the 1990s, Cebeco was aggressively transformed from a trading company into a food processing
one and expanded into potato processing, vegetable processing and meals for airline companies.
The concept of value added food processing became the motto of the cooperative, which expanded
internationally to ameliorate the growth constraint imposed by a small Dutch market. Unfortunately,
this expansion came at the cost of worsened ﬁnancial position as the company reached a point
where 80% of its funds represented debt. Subsequently member-cooperative became more critical of
maintenance and ﬁnancing of activities that were completely unrelated to their own farming businesses.
That represented a major dilemma for management who knew that most proﬁts came from arable
crops while the interests of large cooperative-members were mainly in feed. At the same time, in 1990,
for the ﬁrst time, members obtained direct seats on the Cebeco board of directors, which increased in
size from seven to 11 members.
In 1999, Cebeco celebrated its centennial. Yet, on April 1st, 2010 it formally ceased to exist. While
several hypotheses on the reasons that led to the demise of the cooperative have been coined, most
analyses suggest that it all started with the consistent difﬁculty of the cooperative’s boards to lead
from the emerging future [88]. This was primarily manifested in the failure to align residual income
rights and residual control rights so that real ownership of the cooperative rested in the hands of those
members who transacted with the CEBECO, in proportion to the contribution each of them made to
the total value generated [89]. Such a policy might have been implemented, for example, through the
adoption of a base capital plan adapted to the needs of Cebeco [85].
In terms of volume of Cebeco patronage, member-cooperatives differed signiﬁcantly. Larger
cooperatives had access to own feed production facilities while smaller ones were highly involved in
some of the most proﬁtable activities of Cebeco (i.e., seed breeding and potato processing). Due to
their size, smaller cooperatives were highly dependent on the federated cooperative. At the same
time, Cebeco was providing some services only to smaller members and, together with these members,
Cebeco management opposed pressures from larger members for restructuring. As a result, strategies
that could have saved Cebeco were never discusses, analysed and implemented.
Scholars have brought to the front another heterogeneity-related issue associated with Cebeco’s
degeneration. By not drawing clear and efﬁcient boundaries between activities (and thus members)
that should remain inside the organization and those that should be divested, the cooperative paved
the way for signiﬁcant inﬂuence activities [90]. According to all available evidence, the erroneous
investment decisions made by Cebeco as a result of such activities might have played a decisive role in
determining the cooperative’s fate.
5.10. Unsuccessful Redeﬁning of Purpose/Culture: Agricore United (CA)
Between 1997 and 2007 four major Canadian grain-handling cooperatives were converted into
investor-owned ﬁrms (IOFs). This example focuses on one of these cooperatives, namely, Agricore
United (AU), which in late 2006 was acquired by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a then Canada
Business Corporation Act (CBCA) company. Earl [81] provides an in-depth analysis of the causes
of AU’s demise joining a long list of researchers who conducted similar analyses on the other three
cooperatives-turned-to-IOFs for example, [78,91,92]. These authors identify key factors that led to the
conversion to IOF and, consequently, to the loss of farmer-member control of the business. Yet, they
clearly state as an underlying cause, the excessive member preference heterogeneity that was never
appropriately managed by consecutive boards of directors. This heterogeneity was primarily induced
by key differences in the cultures of older and younger members. As Earl notes that:
“Today, canola and to a lesser extent so-called “specialty crops” like lentils, peas and beans, all of
which trade through the open market, has increased farmers’ comfort with the market and reduced
the perception that cooperative enterprise is a necessary defence against market power. (See also
Hansmann 1999 for the negative impact of “heterogeneity” on co-op organizations.)”. ([81], p. 33)
AU’s leaders never addressed this pervasive paradigm shift and its impact on the cooperative.
The governance and policy operating procedures did not adapt to the needs of the times. Consequently,
there was never implemented a strategic plan on how to spark young members’ in cooperatives and
engage them in these procedures. Actually, most board members themselves perceived cooperative
governance as complex and outdated [81].
6. Implications for Cooperative Theory
Two prominent schools of thought in agricultural cooperation are represented by the
‘extension-of-the-farm’ and ‘co-op-as-a-ﬁrm’ approaches. The ﬁrst argues that cooperatives represent
purely a form of vertical integration by farmers and thus is not a separate ﬁrm, just an extension
of the farms of its members [93]. The latter views cooperatives as organizations having scope of
decision-making independent of their member farms and, thus, can be legitimately analysed as
separate ﬁrms [94]. Each of these schools tends to evaluate the performance of cooperatives in terms of
certain objectives, such as the farm-gate price or return on equity, which correspond to the interests
of stakeholders being prioritized by the respective approach. A third school of cooperative thought,
mentioned above, is the ‘cooperative-as-a-coalition’ approach for example, [12–14], which assumes the
subgroups of members to seek to dominate each other. The scholarly debate between proponents of
these schools of thought dates back to the early 20th century and dominated cooperative theory for
most of the period between 1940 and 1960 and continued in subsequent decades [15,95,96].
From the perspective of the system-environment paradigm, these schools of thought seem to
assume that the cooperative boundaries are ﬁxed. Whereas the existing schools of thought prioritize the
interests of speciﬁc stakeholders and legitimate the struggle between them, the role of the fundamental
solutions is to minimize the scope for this struggle by advancing the search for the true range of the
common interests of the members. The system-environment paradigm may inform the cooperative
theory by stressing the need for the open-mindedness of members and cooperative leaders regarding
the redeﬁnition of cooperative boundaries and goals in an attempt to address pressing heterogeneity
induced costs. This turn from symptomatic solutions to fundamental solutions might be a crucial step
in optimizing cooperative longevity.
Traditional cooperative theories may thus be said to focus on groups characterized by the 1 + 1 > 2
inequality and to have legitimated the use of symptomatic solutions to heterogeneity issues while
turning a blind eye to fundamental solutions. By redrawing the boundaries, the cooperative creates
a new, non-empty core, in which member orientation is feasible without conﬂictual bargaining
between and among subgroups of members. Such redrawing of boundaries may include changing the
purpose, the deﬁnition and allocation of residual control rights and residual claimant rights, or the
cooperative culture of the organization. Without such changes, there will still be space for conﬂicts
and unproductive bargaining [17].
In the contemporary business ethics scholarship, the suggested conﬂict minimization imperative
is centrally implicated in stakeholder theory, which points out that the declarations of primacy of
any type stakeholders in speciﬁc institutional settings inevitably exemplify the win-lose thinking.
Stakeholder theory is a telling example of the awareness of the dysfunctional effects of shareholder
primacy implicit in “the mainstream view of shareholder capitalism” ([97], p. xv). Freeman et al.,
[ibid] convincingly argue that, given the turbulent business environment, enforcing the primacy of
shareholders will have ruinous effects on the long-term business success. Instead of subordinating the
interests of non-shareholding stakeholders to those of shareholders, a much better strategy is to look
for the win-win scenarios of value creation for all stakeholders involved. So far, the cooperative theory
has tended to postulate the primacy of speciﬁc stakeholders, such as members and the management
and explored the dynamics of conﬂict in the processes of negotiation and bargaining. The future
schools of thought in the cooperative theory might take a different stance inspired by the success of
stakeholder theory in the for-proﬁt corporate world and public interest organizations [98]. This is not
to suggest that the process of the adoption of a fundamental solution is possible on the win-win basis,
for the unsustainable “overexpanded” operation of cooperatives may generate beneﬁts to speciﬁc
stakeholders who would not be willing to lose them. Yet, there is a sense in which the idea of win-win
is applicable to the fundamental solutions: if the cooperative services correspond to the true range
of common interests of the members, no cooperative stakeholder would be able to make a legitimate
claim that his/her interests are being unduly neglected.
7. Conclusions
The key argument of this paper is that the challenges facing cooperatives worldwide for several
decades have driven a wedge between cooperative theory and practice. These challenges pertain
primarily to the radically changing business environment of cooperatives, whereas the prevailing
theoretical approaches stem from a period when the business environment was much more stable
and favourable for this organizational form. The paper takes account of these environmental changes
by enriching the cooperative scholarship with the Luhmannian distinction between the part-whole
and system-environment paradigms of systems thinking. The latter paradigm views cooperatives as
operationally closed systems and relegates members to their outer environment to which cooperatives
maintain an inherently precarious relationship. In view of their operational closure, cooperatives
tend to overstrain the carrying capacity of their environment by being active in the areas marked
by a limited extent of the true commonness of member interests. This overstraining result in a
host of problems associated with member heterogeneity. By sticking to the part-whole rather than
system-environment paradigm, the prevailing approaches to cooperative theory have recommended
symptomatic solutions based on the assumption that member loyalty and commitment are key to
the strategic success of cooperatives. Many of these solutions not only failed but also resulted in
unfortunate side effects. The fundamental solutions following from the system-environment paradigm
boil down to the adjustment of cooperative boundaries and goals in light of the evolving range of the
true common interests of the members. If this adjustment is provisionally achieved, strengthening
member loyalty and commitment make perfect sense. If, in contrast, cooperatives overstrain the
carrying capacity of their environment, these management policies aggravate rather than solve
the problem.
From today’s perspective, the prevailing approaches to cooperative theory bring to light the
conﬂictual relations that may unfold in cooperatives, such as the conﬂictual relations between members
and management, or those between different stakeholder coalitions. The obvious desideratum for
further research is the transformation of the conﬂictual win-lose thinking into win-win thinking that
would enable, in practical terms, the diverse cooperative stakeholders to productively work together.
In the for-proﬁt sector context, this is the main ambition of Freeman’s stakeholder approach to business
ethics and strategic management. It seems sensible to expect from the next school of cooperative
thought to apply this ambition to the cooperative context. The key theoretical challenge will be in
understanding how the diverse cooperative stakeholders can achieve win-win outcomes through the
timely adjustment of cooperative goals and boundaries in the light of the dramatically changing range
of the true common interests of the membership base.
