
INTRODUCTION

Horizontal cooperations are collaboration between
firms operating at the same level in the market [6,
149] and thus under absence of primary performance
relations [99, 107]. In contrast to vertical cooperations
the relation between firms in horizontal cooperations
is not in the axis of product flow but transversely,
linking competitors or firms producing complements
[11, 22]. Similar types of processes and a close
resemblance between the customers of the firms are
typical [103]. The aim of horizontal cooperations
is to create a situation that benefits the cooperating
firms more than solitary activities [33, 110]. To sum
it up horizontal cooperations can be defined as interorganizational cooperation between two or more firms
operating at the same level in the market and sharing
commonalities in processes or customer needs in such
a way that all involved parties can benefit from the
cooperation for example due to economies of scale and
use of synergies. Such cooperations have witnessed a
fast-growing interest of practitioners and researchers
alike particularly in emerging economies, as they
provide a viable way for firms to enhance their market
lower levels of reciprocal interdependencies, horizontal
cooperations usually display greater opportunism
than vertical cooperations [107, 117]. Accordingly,
horizontal cooperations are considered more complex
than vertical cooperations and extremely difficult to
govern [150], which is also reflected in failure rates
of up to 70 % [133, 145]. As a result, the identification
of suitable governance mechanisms to restrain
opportunism and improve performance are essential
in horizontal cooperations. Appropriate governance
mechanisms result in long-term stability and superior
economic results [37, 86]. However, while research on
different governance mechanisms like transactional
and relational governance mechanisms in vertical
cooperations is well established in [53, 82, 83, 86,
154, 159, 161] only few contributions have been made
in regards to the different governance mechanisms
applicable to horizontal cooperations [123, 144, 145].
One component affecting the governance of
horizontal cooperations is the perception of
environmentaluncertaintiessurroundingtheindividual
companies. Several studies reveal that environmental
uncertainty moderates the effectiveness of governance
mechanisms [18, 111, 146, 155]. Luo [88] for example
finds that poor performance of cooperations is more
likely to arise in emerging economies, where contract
law is not enforced and information cannot be verified
easily. Subsequently cooperations in emerging
economies face major challenges in governance.
This makes the identification and understanding
of effective governance mechanisms for horizontal
cooperations crucial in emerging economies, as they
differ significantly from the mechanisms in developed
countries [7, 82]. To date, however, little theoretical
or empirical work has addressed the role of perceived
environmental uncertainty on different governance
mechanisms in horizontal cooperations.
The market chosen as object of investigation is the
logistics market in Africa and the Middle East. As
Mason et al. [92] state, the overall pressure on logistics
service providers (LSPs) is increasing. Consequently,
this development is even more threatening for
firms in environments marked by high uncertainty.
Furthermore, the logistics market itself as a typical
representative of the service market rather than a
goods market is confronted with high uncertainties
in the daily business. Additionally, the growing
importance of the logistics market in Africa not only
locally but on a macroeconomic level is underlined
by the CFO of a globally active LSP doing business
in Africa and Middle East. By his own account, the
growth of business in these regions is above average
despite the fact that the infrastructure in most regions
is poorly developed. All this makes LSP in Africa
and the Middle East a noteworthy research object
and appropriate for answering the research gap by
empirically investigating the moderating effect of

perceived environmental uncertainty on transactional
and relational governance mechanisms in horizontal
cooperations.
For this, a partial least squares (PLS) analysis
was employed to test the hypotheses in a model,
encompassing relational and transactional forms
of governance as well as the moderating effect of
environmental uncertainty. The model is based on
a sample of 181 LSP that are engaged in horizontal
cooperations and operating in multiple countries
across Africa and the Middle East. An overview of the
companies is appended. The results of the empirical
analysis are then discussed based on a review of the
extant literature and further verified through expert
interviews. Finally, implications for practice and
guidance for future research are provided.
2

LITERATURE REVIEW

Horizontal cooperations have shown to be an
emerging research field with various contributions
being made by scholars towards different levels
of analysis (e.g. [33, 94, 115]). Wilhelm [118], who
found evidence through case studies and interviews
that relational aspects such as regular meetings can
reduce the competitive tension in horizontal supply
chain relations in the automotive industry, has made
an illustrative contribution to this research field. More
recently, Muñoz-Villamizar et al. [100] developed a
formal mathematical modeling approach to visualize
the effects of horizontal collaboration in urban freight
transportation, which is then applied to a case study.
A commonly used denominator in research has been
the governance of horizontal cooperations as they
are more vulnerable to opportunism. For horizontal
cooperations between LSPs, restraining opportunism
is even more essential due to the idiosyncrasy of the
industry, as competitive advantage between LSPs is
often based on process-related knowledge that can
easily be absorbed and imitated by cooperation partners
[124]. Furthermore, the general results from Badri et
al. [7] show the dissimilarity of mature and emerging
markets concerning performance under uncertain
conditions. In a study developing a framework for
horizontal LSP cooperations, Verstrepen et al. [142]
accentuate that control mechanisms of horizontal
cooperations can positively influence the cooperation
without examining their effects quantitatively. In
2011, Wallenburg and Raue examined relational and
formal governance mechanisms in horizontal LSP
cooperations to control conflicts. Their results indicate
that relational and formal mechanisms govern conflict
between partners, with relational governance having
the higher impact. Most recently, Schmoltzi and
Wallenburg [123] examined the effect of operational
governance in horizontal LSP cooperations and
found support that operational governance positively
and mutual influence. However, these studies leave
out the interrelation between transactional and
relational governance and do not take into account
the moderating effects of environmental uncertainty
on the effectiveness of relational and transactional
governance mechanisms in horizontal LSP
cooperations.
2.1
Environmental Uncertainty
In vertical cooperations however, several contributions
examine the effects of environmental uncertainty
on governance instruments. Zhou and Poppo [162],
for example, examine the role of the transactional
mechanism contracts and the relational mechanism
trust in Chinese buyer-supplier relationships. Their
results reveal that the effectiveness of the individual
governance mechanism is dependent on the level of
environmental uncertainty. Wang et al. [146] recently
examined the moderating effect of environmental
uncertainty on contracts and trust in supply chain
relationships. In similarity to previous findings, Zhou
and Poppo [162] found a positive effect for trust, but
no significant positive effect on contracts. Another
recent contribution on the effects of environmental
uncertainty has been made by Wong et al. [155], who
provide empirical evidence of a contingency effect of
environmental uncertainty on supply chain integration
and operational performance.
2.2
Transactional Governance
In the extant literature, in particular in the supply chain
context, it is commonly held that transaction based
governance mechanisms are of special importance
to restrain opportunism and improve performance
within a business relation (e.g.; [111]). Scholars have
frequently drawn on transaction cost economics
(TCE), developed by Williamson in 1975, to show how
transaction mechanisms can suppress opportunism
in cooperations. Transactional mechanisms are
manifested either in jointly agreed contractual
paragraphs or in transaction-specific investments
[86]. Srinivasan and Brush [128], for instance, identify
contracts as a transactional mechanism to safeguard
cooperations and drive supplier performance. Van
Hoek [141] examines economic exchanges that cover
customer-specific LSP service arrangements, such
as final assembly or warehousing activities, and
finds that they are positively related to the existence
of formal contracts. Transactional mechanisms
entailing transaction-specific investments were
found to increase the performance in buyer-supplier
relationships [86]. In another work, Vivek et al. [143]
examined the role of different forms of transactional
governance in cooperations and found that transactionspecific investments increase the mutual dependence
of the partners.

3

2.3
Relational Governance
To address shortcomings of transactional mechanisms,
researchers have studied governance mechanisms
based upon the reciprocal and reinforcing nature of
social relationships [14]. A number of contributions
have been made with respect to individual aspects
of relational governance mechanisms. These studies
mainly focus on trust as a relational governance
instrument. Dyer and Chu [36] examine whether
trust operates as a self-enforcing safeguard in vertical
cooperation settings and find that trust is particularly
valuable as a governance mechanism. This is due to
certain value-creating behaviors, which in turn lead
to even higher levels of trust. Besides trust, in a study
on buyer-supplier relationships by Gao et al. [45],
commitment was identified as an important relational
element to govern that exchange.
In addition to trust and commitment, researchers such
as McEvily and Marcus [93] mention embeddedness
as a further element of relational governance. The role
of embeddedness to govern cooperations has been
examined in the steel and semiconductor industry by
Rowley et al. [121], who found mixed results regarding
the positive effect on the performance in horizontal
supplier networks. In a recent contribution on
organizational difference, cooperation performance
and relational mechanisms, Lavie et al. [79] stress the
mutually reinforcing nature of the individual elements
trust, embeddedness and commitment, consequently
referring to them as a unified relational mechanisms
definition. While individual aspects of relational-based
governance have also been examined in horizontal
cooperations (e.g. [150]), the unified relational
mechanisms notion has not yet been examined as a
governance tool in horizontal cooperation settings.
2.4
Interaction Effect
A number of contributions have been made with
respect to interaction effects of transactional and
relational governance. Poppo and Zenger [111]
empirically confirm that transactional and relational
governance function as complements. However, the
authors do not examine their joint usage. In a study
by Ferguson et al. [39], transactional and relational
governance forms are examined as a socioeconomic
interaction problem, and governance is based upon
a transactional-relational continuum ranging from
close ties based on trust, reciprocity and interaction
towards contractual governance mechanisms. Among
the few academic studies dealing with transactional
and relational mechanisms as well as their interaction,
Liu et al. [86] are more comprehensive. They provide
a wide-ranging framework to examine the individual
and joint effectiveness of the two different governance
mechanisms on the relationship performance, and find
CONCEPTUAL MODEL

Transaction costs, social relations, and environmental
uncertainties are commonly used to explain the
behavior of firms in economic exchanges [163]. This is
supported by further empirical studies on governance
in cooperations, which showed that governance
mechanisms entail relational and transactional
mechanisms [18, 55, 162] and are moderated by their
external environment [146]. Hence, environmental
uncertainty moderates the effectiveness of relational
and transactional governance mechanisms [18, 111].
To develop the causal relationships of the model,
transaction cost theory as well as social exchange
served as basis, as both these theories may provide
helpful insights on the adoption of governance
mechanisms in horizontal cooperations under
environmental uncertainty [84, 86, 162].
This section, based on relevant research literature,
contains definitions and the operationalization
of the environmental uncertainty’s effect on
the performance of cooperations. Subsequently,
the effectiveness of transactional and relational
mechanisms as governance tools are operationalized
individually. For both of them a positive effect on
cooperation performance is assumed. In addition, a
description and operationalization of the moderating
effect of environmental uncertainty on transactional
and relational mechanisms is given. The underlying
hypothesis is that the two governance mechanisms
become more important under environmental
uncertainty. Figure 1 schematically outlines the
conceptual model and related hypotheses.

3.1
Environmental Uncertainty
Environmental uncertainty requires exchange partners
to constantly monitor their external situation and adapt
their operations and strategies accordingly [101]. This
is particularly apparent in emerging economies which
tend to have higher levels of economic volatility [135],
weak infrastructure and poor functioning institutions
[60, 95]. For firms operating in emerging economies,
environmental uncertainties are characterized by the
lack of strong legal frameworks or binding social
norms, as well as difficulties in verification of market
information and unclear governmental regulations,
which increases the potential for opportunism [88].
These environmental uncertainties cannot be ignored
as they impact the performance of cooperating firms
[146]. Therefore, the first proposal is:
H1.

Environmental uncertainty has a negative
impact on the performance of horizontal LSP
cooperations.

3.2

Transaction mechanisms and moderating
effects of environmental uncertainty
Transactional mechanisms are derived from economic
rationality and emphasize governing economic
exchanges through monitoring and incentivebased structures in order to reduce opportunistic
behavior [151]. A major instrument of transactional
mechanisms that safeguards economic exchanges are
formal contracts [152]. Contracts, however, require
the existence of solid institutions to guarantee their
effectiveness. In most emerging economies, these
solid institutions do not exist, making the enforcement

Transaction Mechanisms
ICT
Investments
Asset
Investments

Transaction
Specific
Investments

Interaction Effect

H 2a

Transactional Mechanisms
X
Relational Mechanisms

H 2b

Environmental
Uncertainty

H 1

H 3b

Relational
Commitment

H 3a

Relationship
Embeddedness

Relationships

Relationship
Trust
Relational Mechanisms

Fig. 1: Structural equation model

Cooperation
Performance

emerging economies, transaction-specific investments
may thus act as a substitute to contracts and compensate
the relatively weaker contractual governance [86].
Transaction-specific investments can therefore be seen
as an important incentive tool in economic exchanges
[147], as they create interdependences between
partners by fostering non-opportunistic behavior [62].
In a logistics and supply chain context, transactionspecific investments can encompass investments
into assets such as the integration of Information
and Communication Technologies (ICT) as well as
investments into assets that help to align processes
between LSPs and reduce transactional uncertainties
[3, 158]. One of the main purposes of ICT investments
are the realization of real-time transmissions and
processing of information required for decision
making [113], thus facilitating cooperations between
LSPs [71]. Besides technically enabling cooperation,
investments into ICT also reduce transaction costs and
transaction risks [66].
Joint investments of LSPs into logistics assets are
another factor of transaction-specific investments that
substantially reduce the individual purchasing costs
[37] and serve as an important reason for LSPs to
engage in horizontal partnerships [28]. In the present
context, transaction specific investments into logistics
assets may encompass assets such as a warehouse
facility, trucks, warehouse-handling equipment, or
fuel [19]. In referring to the unified transactional
governance mechanisms, the following hypothesis is
derived:
H2a. Transactional governance mechanisms are
positively related to the performance of
horizontal LSP cooperations.
An overview of literature regarding the relation
between individual transactional governance
mechanisms and the performance of horizontal LSP
cooperations as well as the individual relational
governance mechanisms and the performance of
horizontal LSP cooperations is included in the
appendix as supplement.
Environmental uncertainty presents operational
challenges to LSPs due to difficulties in decision
making for activities like transport volume
and shipment schedule [148]. For cooperations,
environmental uncertainty cannot be ignored [146],
as the effect of transactional governance on a firm’s
performance may vary under the high pressure
of environmental uncertainty. Higher levels of
environmental uncertainty encourage firms to
maintain flexibility [47] in order to effectively adapt
to disruptions in the flow of goods whilst maintaining
service levels [129]. ICT integration and sharing
of logistics assets to counteract environmental
uncertainty can achieve flexibility in horizontal LSP
cooperations. It also improves the ability of LSPs to

5

generate and disseminate information in response to
the changing environment in their logistics operations.
The continuous exchange of information between
cooperation partners about transported goods enables
LSPs to swiftly re-route them in case of any external
disturbance, thus ensuring the efficient physical flow
of goods even under environmental uncertainty.
In horizontal LSP cooperations the sharing of assets
provides individual LSPs with operational flexibility
to adapt to highly volatile markets and to reduce the
uncertainty about future prospects [104].
If fluctuations in transportation volume are high,
the benefits of shared assets increase as the costs
for the individual LSP are reduced. If cooperation
partners share their assets, goods can easily be shifted
between different warehouses and transported via
different routes, depending on the environmental
contingencies. Further, joint investments into
warehouses or trucks by cooperating LSPs signal
the cooperation partners sincerity of the cooperation
and at the same time reduce the dependence on
individually owned assets, thus increasing flexibility.
However, if the environment is predictable it reduces
the need to adapt to disruptions and constantly
monitor the cooperation relationships, thus mitigating
the need of ICT integration and the joint investment
into logistics assets with cooperation partners.
Therefore, it can be argued that the effectiveness of
transactional governance mechanisms is subject to the
influence of environmental uncertainty. Specifically,
transactional governance mechanisms enhance the
performance of horizontal LSP cooperations under
uncertain environmental conditions, as they increase
the flexibility and promote transparency of each
individual LSP [154]. Hence, it is proposed that:
H2b. The relationship between transactional
governance and cooperation performance is
moderated by environmental uncertainty, such
that the impact of the transactional governance
mechanisms is positive and stronger the higher
the environmental uncertainty is.
3.3

Relational mechanisms and moderating
effects of environmental uncertainty
According to social exchange theory, relational
mechanisms deal with the roles of social interactions
and socially embedded relationships in economic
exchanges like horizontal cooperations [52, 137]. The
most essential distinction between social exchanges
and economic transactions is that the former entails
unspecified obligations whereas the latter rests on
formal contracts that specify the exact terms of
exchange [159]. Governance emerges from the values
and processes found in these social interactions
and socially embedded relationships in economic
exchanges [80, 45] as they prevent opportunism and
thus reduce transaction costs [37]. In prior academic
this Ferguson [39] as well as Lavie et al. [79] suggest
that most relational mechanisms can be associated
with either trust, embeddedness or commitment. This
distinction in three mechanisms shall be applied in the
following.
In inter-organizational cooperations social exchange
scholars define trust as “the expectation of exchange
partners that the other parties can be relied on, will
behave as predicted and act fairly in the cooperation”
[160, p. 143]. This view of interorganizational trust
implies that the exchange parties rely on trust in risky
and uncertain economic conditions [162]. The more the
exchange partners trust each other, the more they feel
assured that their cooperation partners will cooperate
in good faith, rather than behave opportunistically
[36]. Trust is therefore considered an essential
characteristic of relational governance mechanisms of
cooperations in emerging economies [162].
In social exchange theory, the notion of relational
embeddedness is strongly shared by scholars in the
areas of strategic management, organizational theory
and organizational economics [72, 137, 139, 140]. It
defines the degree to which social attachment and
interpersonal ties drive economic relationships [52].
Through the repeated face-to-face interactions among
exchange partners, interpersonal ties can develop and
exploitation of exchange partners is less likely to occur
in the cooperation [57, 137]. Particularly, embeddedness
mitigates risks inherent in exchange situations under
environmental uncertainty, by developing safeguards
such as the exchange of information between
cooperating firms [163]. Embeddedness therefore acts
as a relational governance mechanism in horizontal
cooperations in emerging economies.
A further relational governance mechanism is
the commitment between cooperation partners.
Commitment can be defined as ‘‘an implicit or
explicit pledge of relational continuity between
exchange partners’’ [35, p. 19], and acts as an intrinsic
motivation for partnering firms to be dedicated to
their cooperation by establishing lasting, reciprocal
responsibilities [91]. Consequently, the commitment
between partners in cooperative relationships acts
as an important governance mechanism to deter
opportunism.
Horizontal cooperations usually display lower
levels of dependence than vertical cooperations.
This suggests that individual norms such as trust
alone might not overcome the fear of opportunism
[153]. Consequently, individual aspects of relational
mechanisms in horizontal LSP cooperation must be
supported by further governance mechanisms. In
fact, studies by McEvily and Marcus [93] have shown
that the individual aspects of relational mechanisms
are highly interrelated and often mutually reinforcing
rather than independent. Trust between cooperation
partners, for example, nurtures the commitment

between them, which in turn encourages partners
to strive for a continuation of their cooperation [51].
Therefore, and in accordance with the unified construct
of relational mechanisms the next hypothesis is:
H3a. Relational governance mechanisms are
positively related to the performance of
horizontal LSP cooperations.
The high uncertainty characteristics of emerging
economies are likely to reinforce the role of social
relationships as a governance mechanism. People in
emerging economies traditionally rely on personal
contacts and networks rather than on formal
mechanisms to coordinate horizontal exchange
relationships [89]. When firms encounter increased
environmental uncertainty, they tend to count on
personal relationships to gain cooperation partners
and work through the unforeseen contingencies.
Social relationships let LSPs develop commitment,
embeddedness and trust with other LSPs, which
reduces the costs for monitoring the relationships as
partner firms will find each other more trustworthy
in conducting business transactions, and thus become
more cooperative [79]. These costs are particularly
high if the environmental conditions are uncertain as
regular changes and volatility in commodities such as
fuel provide ample opportunities for opportunism in
horizontal cooperations. Social relationships are hence
an essential component to govern horizontal exchange,
particularly when it is too costly for the partner firms
to account for all unforeseen contingencies in the
cooperation [148].
In addition to reducing the costs related to
monitoring the behavior of cooperation partners,
social relationships increase the transparency across
the cooperation so that individual LSPs can plan
and justify their decisions under environmental
uncertainty [146]. These relational mechanisms
provide cooperation partners with the flexibility to
cope with environmental uncertainties that arise in
emerging economies. According to social exchange
theory perspective, social relationships can improve
partner cooperation due to the reciprocal interest by
collaborating firms to build beneficial relationships.
This interest is more obvious under environmental
uncertainty when firms are obliged to return favors to
partners to assist in difficult conditions [148]. If strong
social relationships exist, LSPs facing highly volatile
market conditions are more willing to adapt to their
partners’ needs and make concessions towards other
LSPs in order to counterbalance the volatility. This
flexibility helps LSPs to mitigate exchange hazards
under uncertainty and strengthens the performance
of cooperations [87]. Consequently, it can be assumed
that in emerging economies relational mechanisms are
more effective to prevent opportunism than in stable
economic conditions. The corresponding hypothesis
and cooperation performance is moderated
by environmental uncertainty, such that
the impact of the relational governance
mechanisms is positive and stronger the higher
the environmental uncertainty is.
3.4

Interaction effect of transactional and
relational mechanisms
In practice it appears that many effective cooperations
use multiple governance mechanisms simultaneously
rather than relying only on transactional or relational
mechanisms [37]. Although it is commonly agreed that
transactional and relational governance mechanisms
interact with each other it is subject of controversy
whether they are substitutes [37, 156] or complements
[87, 111, 146]. Some scholars like Wuyts and
Geyskens [156] argue that transactional and relational
mechanisms may be less effective when used together
than when used separately to govern cooperations
as transactional mechanisms in combination with
relational mechanisms can result in a vicious circle of
distrust and retribution. However, other researchers
claim that transactional and relational aspects of
governance may be complements, as they do not suffice
to hinder opportunism when applied individually [87,
163].
As such transactional governance mechanisms
generally provide a tangible framework by making
transaction-specific investments within which
intangible relational mechanisms can perform and
compensate the legal and institutional hazards in
emerging economies [86]. This is acknowledged
by previous research, which has well documented
the beneficial effects on business performance if
cooperations are not solely governed by one form of
governance, but by multiple mechanisms jointly [86,
126, 143, 146, 162].
Due to the indistinct interaction effect between
a transactional and a relational mechanism, it is
considered as a control variable for the performance
impact in horizontal cooperations.
4

RESEARCH DESIGN

4.1
Questionnaire development
Prior to data collection, content and face validity of
the questionnaire were tested in four sequential steps
[132]. First, an item-sorting process was used in which
five Ph.D. scholars correctly matched the individual
measurement items with their intended constructs
at a rate exceeding 90%. This is deemed acceptable
to offer evidence for content validity [97, 106].
Second, in personal interviews lasting between thirty
minutes and two hours, eight scholars in the field of
management and logistics who were familiar with the
constructs tested the survey instrument for structure,

7

completeness, clarity, and appropriateness in an
academic setting. Third, a panel of five CEOs of LSPs
from South Africa, Kenya, Botswana, Oman and the
UAE reviewed the survey instrument. These interviews
in particular served to check the overall validity of
questions in varying economic environments [94]. In
the fourth step, a pre-test for the survey instrument
was carried out on a random sample taken from the
original database to assess the construct variances
captured by the measurement items. Based upon the
received feedback from the three steps modifications
were made at each step. This procedure ensured the
survey instrument had substantive validity to be
understandable and relevant to LSP practices in Africa
and Middle Eastern countries.
4.2
Data collection
There are two reasons that led to the decision to
focus on data from LSPs operating in multiple African
and Middle Eastern countries. First, these countries
represent emerging economies that usually display
higher levels of environmental uncertainty. Second,
few empirical studies have focused on countries within
these two regions. For example, Hoskisson et al. [60]
and Acquaah [1] state that there is a lack of research
dealing with the African and Middle Eastern region.
Furthermore, among emerging economies the regions
of Africa and the Middle East are of special interest
due to their steadily increasing economic importance.
Besides diversification of the trading partners in
geographical aspects, investments in infrastructure
and changes towards a more open policy between
countries strengthen the overall economy in general
and the logistics service sector specifically [2]. For
2017, the inflows of foreign direct investments to
African countries are expected to increase by about
10%. Several trade agreements and partnerships,
both inter- and intraregional, underpin the efforts of
the countries towards stronger integration in global
trade [136]. Drivers of this positive development
are increased demand stemming from the domestic
market as well as improvements in the area of business
environment. Opportunities for growth are attributed
to improvement and utilization of business clusters
[2], which in turn are strongly related to horizontal
cooperations [81].
Besides the general economic situation of the region,
there are considerations to be taken into account that
base on a firms’ perspective. Several large European
LSPs do not have own subsidiaries in countries on the
African continent or in the Middle East. The reason is
the relatively low transport volume compared to the
western market. Instead of investing in own assets in
these regions they make intense use of small LSPs to
be able to offer logistics services to their customers
in the western market whenever needed. Although
the logistics market in Africa and the Middle East is
a niche market, the European firms need to offer this
pledge of service.
The specification of a multi-country in contrast to
a single-country study allows consideration of data
from not only one specific country but a diverse set of
countries and thus a comparison between them. The
number of countries considered in a multi-country
study in recent literature across disciplines varies
between two [40] and 44 [70] or even up to 70 in case
of the World Health Survey by the WHO. For example,
Görg et al. [50] perform their study in supply chain
context in 19 countries of Sub-Saharan Africa. This
multi-country approach was supported by the fact
that the sample was based on the participant list of an
annual meeting of LSPs. As largest event of its kind
in the African and Middle Eastern Region, it attracts
numerous market participants and a representative
sample of LSPs across multiple countries of the
African continent as well as the Middle Eastern
Region. Further, by employing a multi-country study, a
high grade of generalizability as well as transferability
of the results is reached, which might not be possible
when conducting a single-country study [59, 68].
Consequently, the true state of businesses across
regions is described more accurately [116] in a multicountry study.
The sample frame consists of 2454 LSPs covered
under the International Standard of Industrial
Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC)
Revision 4 class codes 4923, 5012, 5120 and 5210. After
excluding 336 entries for missing or wrong addresses,
the survey was sent to a total of 2118 firms. Senior
managers (CEOs and general managers) were invited
via a personalized email to complete an online survey,
as they usually tend to be the most knowledgeable
people when it comes to horizontal cooperations [144].
The questionnaire was translated into English and
back again by another person. There were two main
reasons for this approach. First, Africa and the Middle
East host numerous different languages and dialects
that could impossibly be realized in a questionnaire
at reasonable expense. Furthermore, the study aims
to question international active firms. By setting up
the questionnaire in English, the local firms whose
employees are not capable of English are excluded
from the study. After setting up the questionnaire in
this way, the questionnaire was emailed to the sample
frame in June 2013.
Three weeks after the initial mailing, personalized
reminder e-mails were sent to all potential participants.
Those who did not respond within six to eight weeks
after the initial mailing received a reminder telephone
call to improve the response rate [43]. The number of
181 firms from the target regions that sent complete
and usable responses constitutes a response rate of
8.4 percent. This level is not uncommon for emerging
markets [60] and in line with previous research
papers in the emerging environment context [34]. To

grant balance of the sample regarding firm size, the
demographics (firm size) of the sample was checked
following Wallenburg and Raue [144]. The distribution
of respondents is depicted in attachment A of this
paper.
4.3
Measures
All constructs introduced in Section 3 and displayed in
Figure 1 constitute latent variables that require indirect
measurement [24]. The constructs were all measured
using a multi-item seven-point Likert scale. As the
constructs of the study are management practices
which reflect their indicators [31] they were drafted
with the exemption of the performance construct as
reflective measures. For the measurement of assets as
part of the transaction mechanisms, scales from Buvik
and John [16] were employed, while the ICT construct
was measured with scales from Prajogo et al. [114] and
Tallon and Pinsonneault [131].
The relational governance mechanisms made up by
embeddedness, trust and commitment were measured
with scales used by Heide and Miner [57], Lawson et
al. [80] and Liu et al. [86]. The measurement of trust
made use of items from Nyaga et al. [102] and Morgan
and Hunt [98]. For commitment, scales used by Morgan
and Hunt [98]; Benton and Maloni [12]; Goo et al. [49];
and Lavie et al. [79] went into action. Environmental
uncertainty was measured with the scale of Tseng
and Lee [135]. All measures were slightly adapted in
wording to fit the research context.
The measurement of performance in cooperations
has gained much attention from researchers [4, 85, 122].
A single performance measurement cannot sufficiently
describe the positive effects of cooperations. Therefore,
researchers distinguish between several performance
measures to examine cooperation success. The
approach used in this paper draws on the work done
by Schmoltzi and Wallenburg [123], who list financial
performance measures based on accounting measures
[17] and cost reductions [77], operational measures
such as logistics efficiency [44], and organizational
effectiveness measures [12, 67]. Based on the extended
literature research, these dimensions provide support
for reasonable comprehensiveness of the construct.
For the performance construct measurement, a proven
approach was chosen. It specifies to rely on executives’
perceptions of their firms’ performance [e.g. 67, 84].
Consequently, utilizing a Type II MIMIC-model
[31], the performance construct was measured as a
second order formative construct that is represented
by the lead items of financial, cost, operational and
perceptual performance dimensions. The model is
represented in Figure 2.
Since only one respondent from all the contacted
companies provided the data for the study, concerns of
common method variance may be raised. Therefore,
Harman’s single-factor test was applied in order to
examine the possibility of common method variance

0.120

FiPe1

0.088

FiPe2

0.133

FiPe3

0.159

FiPe4

0.329

CoPe1

0.186

CoPe2

0.199

CoPe3

0.219

CoPe4

0.298

OpPe1

0.247

OpPe2

0.192

OpPe3

0.461

RePe1

0.190

RePe2

0.257

RePe3

0.938
0.955
0.931
0.917

Financial
Performance
0.435

0.819
0.902
0.895
0.884

Cost
Performance

0.838
0.868
0.899

Operational
Performance

0.734
0.900
0.862

R2=0.952

0.321

0.247

Cooperation
Performance
(2nd order refl.)

Cooperation
Performance
(1st order form.)

0.976

FiPe2
0.519
0.285
0.289
0.193

CoPe2
OpPe3

Relationship
Performance

RePe2

0.222

Fig. 2: Results for the formative performance model
in one general factor accounting for the majority of
covariance in the variables. A factor analysis showed
that there is no such general factor that accounted for
the majority of the variance in the tested variables. Less
than 39% variance was extracted by a single factor with
half of the items revealing factor loadings well below
.5. This result indicates that the dataset does not suffer
from a common method variance problem [109]. To
further confirm the representativeness of the sample,
a chi-square test was conducted. The examination
of difference between the late and the early bird of
respondents across number of cooperation partners
(χ2 = .186; p = .714), duration of cooperations (χ2 = .383;
p = .814), and firm size (χ2 = .434; p = .858) suggests
that the taken sample is not noticeably different on
Trust

Nyaga
2010
Morgan
1994
Lavie
2011
Morgan
1994
Wallenburg
2011
Heide
1992
Lawson
2008
Prajago
2011
Tallon
2011
Tseng
2010
Tang
2011
Wong
2011
Swamidass
1987

Commitment

Nyaga
2010
1

Morgan
1994

-.700**

Lavie
2011

certain characteristics than nonresponding firms, as
non-response bias is not evident in the sample [132].
Convergence of the measurement model and
differentiation of the latent exogenous constructs
were tested via a multitrait multimethod (MTMM)
matrix [8]. The latent exogenous constructs were
measured using items from at least two different
authors for trust, commitment, embeddedness, ICT
and environment. The MTMM matrix as displayed in
Table 1 indicates that the individual measurements per
construct are higher correlated among each other than
they are correlated with other constructs. As such, it is
reasonable that the measurement model is convergent
and the individual constructs do measure different
traits of the measurement model [8].

Embeddedness

Morgan
1994

Wallenburg
2011

ICT

Heide
1992

Prajago
2011

Environment

1

-.204

**

.321**

-.305

**

**

.794**

.336**

.859**

.692**

-.508

**

.716

**

.521

**

.544

**

.547**

-.484

**

.671

**

.386

**

.478

**

**

-.221**

.315**

.056

**

**

Tallon
2011

Tseng
2010

Tang
2011

Wong
2011

Swamidass
1987

1

-.292**

Lawson
2008

-.286

.425

.368

1

.205

.131
**

.254

1

.388

.283

**

.841**

1

.222**

.095
**

1

.249**

**

**

.304

.512

1
.531**
*

1

-.158

.067

.015

-.068

.109

-.042

-.077

.167

.106

1

-.291**

.203*

.082

.013

.176*

.056

.009

.201*

.161

.985**

*

**

-.158

.067

.015

-.068

.109

-.042

-.077

.167

.106

1.000

-.259**

.147

-.007

-.086

.111

.028

-.037

.194*

.140

**

Notes: Correlations between /among dimensions of the same construct in bold print

Table 1: Multi Trait Multi Method measurement

.931

1
.985**
.930

**

1
.931**

assessed separately. An analysis of the individual
item reliabilities, the convergent validity and the
discriminant validity allows to assess the acceptability
of the reflective constructs [105]. A bootstrapping
procedure with 250, 500 and 1000 resamples taken
from the original sample ascertains the significance
of the parameter estimates of the research model. The
results are consistent across all bootstrap samples. As

shown in Table 2, all estimates of the outer loadings
exhibit sufficient t-values and exceed the recommended
threshold for item loadings of .7, indicating that more
than one-half of the item’s variance can be attributed
to the construct [58].
To assess construct reliability, Cronbach’s alpha
value (α) was determined [9]. The α-value for all
constructs was well above the suggested cut-off value
of .7, indicating sufficient reliability [26]. Similarly,
the composite reliability (CR) for all constructs was

Overview of indicators and measures of reliability and validity.
Constructs and Indicators
outer loadings
point estimation
Embeddedness (α= .79, AVE= .72,CR= .88)

t-value

95% confidence intervall
Upper
Lower
bound
bound

EMB02

The responsibility for making sure the relationship works for both of us an this
supplier is shared jointly.

EMB03

In most aspects of this relationship the parties are jointly responsible for getting
things done.

Trust (α= .73, AVE= .65,CR= .85)
TRU01

This supplier/buyer considers our welfare as well as its own.

TRU02

In our relationship, my cooperation partners (major supplier) can be counted on to
do what is right.

TRU03

19.072

.774

.786

.917

49.778

.912

.918

.838

19.584

.829

.842

.805

22.509

.801

.812

.858

38.042

.856

.862

.752

13.417

.743

.759

.817

11.070

.788

.809

.840

16.609

.821

.836

.762

16.593

.760

.773

.828

21.079

.819

.830

.806

19.962

.798

.809

.771

16.266

.762

.776

.838

33.653

.835

.842

.835

29.747

.832

.840

15.034

.785

.800

.872

24.991

.862

.873

.866

32.600

.860

.868

.844

28.756

.840

.849

.843

In this relationship, the parties work together to solve problems.

.777

.796

EMB01

4.422

.767

.823

.911

4.806

.845

.901

.850

4.321

.767

.825

.830

4.430

.740

.795

We trust this supplier keeps our best interests in mind.

Committment (α= .73, AVE= .65,CR= .84)
COM01

The relationship that my firm has with our cooperation partners deserves our firm's
maxim efforts to maintain.

COM02

We are committed to preserve good relationshisp with our cooperation partners

COM03

The relationship we have with our cooperation partners is something we intend to
maintain indefinately

Asset Alignment (α= .87, AVE= .67,CR= .91)
AA01

My company has upgraded its logistical facilities (storage, transportation or
information systems, and the like) in order to deal efficiently with partners

AA02

My company has committed time and resources to conform to our partner’s
requirements regarding logistical performance
My company has committed time and resources to develop an acceptable quality
assurance program in this partnership

AA03
AA04

AA05

My company has made investments to restructure and integrate our logistical
facilities with our partner’s logistical facilities
We have made a substantial investments in shipping and storage (distribution)
facilities tailored for our partners

Information and Communication Technology Integration (α= .87, AVE= .71,CR= .91)
ICT01
ICT02
ICT03
ICT04

Inter-organizational coordination is achieved using electronic links
We have electronic mailing capabilities with our cooperation partners
We use electronic transfer of purchase orders, invoices, and/or funds with
cooperation partners
We use advanced information systems to track and/or expedite shipments

Environmental Uncertainty (α= .88, AVE= .67,CR= .91)
ENU02
ENU03
ENU04
ENU05

Laws to regulate international businesses is predictable
Laws to regulate local businesses is predictable
Import tariffs are predictable
Enforcement of existing laws is predictable

α – Cronbach’s alpha; AVE – average variance explained; CR – composite reliability


assessed. All of the observed CR values were greater
than .8, and as such above the suggested cut-off value
of .6 [9, 58]. Average variance extracted (AVE) was
used to test for convergent validity in the data set. All
AVE values were found above the cut-off value of .5,
as recommended by Henseler et al. [61] and Fornell
and Larcker [42]. Table 2 shows the results for the
assessed α, CR and AVE values.
In order to evaluate discriminant validity, AVE was
used. As Table 3 indicates, the square root of the
AVE of each construct is higher than its correlations
with all other constructs. In consequence, it can be
concluded that none of the constructs shares more
variance with another construct than with its own
indicators and the model thus exhibits sufficient levels
of discriminant validity [58]. Finally, by ensuring a
comprehensive foundation of the research model in the
relevant literature and the review of the survey with
industry experts and academic scholars as pointed out
in Section 4.1, content validity is covered.
Construct
ASS

COM

EMB

ENV

ICT

Asset

.816

Committment

.316

.807

Embeddedness

.394

.473

.846

Environment

.141

.049

-.019

.859

ICT

.407

.232

.489

.066

.845

Trust

.451

.446

.617

.110

.367

TRU

.806

Square root of AVE on diagonal in bold face

Table 3: Correlation Matrix of the Latent Variables
To assess reliability and validity of the second-order
formative performance constructs, the item weights,
multicolinearity between items, and the nomological
validity of the formative construct was examined
[105]. The magnitude of all item weights are greater
than .10 and the sign of the item weight is consistent
with the underlying theory [105]. The Variance
Inflation Factor (VIF) shows all item values are less
than 3.3 [30].This indicates that multi-collinearity
does not seem to pose a problem. Further, all four
items are significant at the .001 level. Correlation of
the formative items with other constructs of the model
according to the hypothesized causal model served
as test for nomological validity [31]. The results
indicate positive and highly significant relationships
between cooperation performance and transactional
and relational governance mechanisms, signaling the
validity of the cooperation performance construct.
The results of the formative items are shown in Table
4.

Measurement property of formative construct

95% confidence interval

Construct

Item Weight

Lower

Upper

VIF

7.990

Bound
.283

Bound
.299

1.883

13.068

.509

.521

1.630

.289

8.325

.285

.298

1.372

.193

5.260

.182

.197

1.206

Performance
[CoPe3]

.285

[FiPe2]

.519

[OpPe4]
[RePe3]

T-stat

Table 4: Measurement property of formative
construct
4.4
Data Analysis
For the dataset and model specification at hand partial
least squares (PLS) has been used as the appropriate
an appropriate algorithm for testing the hypotheses of
the research model. It is a variance-based structural
equation modeling (SEM) approach that increasingly
gains traction in the business literature as an
alternative means to traditional covariance-based
SEM techniques [105]. While some publications like
Rönkkö and Evermann [120] question the relevance of
PLS as a statistical measurement tool because of the
lack of a test of the overall model fit, it nevertheless
provides a better methodological fit concerning the
measurement model for the sample.
PLS avoids the problems inherent in small sample
sizes below the threshold of 250 observations that is
recommended for covariance-based SEM techniques
[48]. Further, compared with covariance-based SEM
techniques, PLS provides more conservative estimates
of the individual path coefficients and does not require
normally distributed data [20]. In addition, moderating
effects and higher order factors as specified in the
current research model require a larger number of
parameter estimates in covariance-based SEM models
compared to PLS-SEM techniques, as covariancebased SEM techniques may lead to identification and
convergence issues [105].
PLS also has an advantage over covariance-based
SEM techniques when formative constructs are part
of the research model, as covariance-based SEM
techniques may lead to unidentified models [65].
Therefore, the variance-based PLS approach seems
more suitable, as small sample sizes, moderating
effects, and higher order formative constructs are
present [105]. For the calculations, the software tool
SmartPLS, version 2.0 [119] was used. The results of
the estimation for the structural model are displayed
Investments
Asset
Investments

0.540

0.650

Transaction
Specific
Investments

Interaction Effect

-0.199

Transactional Mechanisms
X
Relational Mechanisms

0.579

Environmental
Uncertainty

R2=0.698

Cooperation
Performance
(1st order form.)

-0.571

0.136

0.616

Relational
Commitment
Relationship
Embeddedness
Relationship
Trust

0.337

0.464

0.026

Relationships

0.409

Relational Mechanisms

Fig. 3: Results of the empirical model
The R 2 value of the endogenous latent variable
performance (R 2 =.698) must be considered substantial
[20] as the performance of horizontal exchange
relationships is impacted by many other aspects
besides transactional and relational governance.
While Cruijssen et al. [28] specifically examine
horizontal LSP cooperations and identify, among
others, joint purchases, process alignment and service
extension as drivers for cooperation performance,
other researchers name knowledge development [61],
information sharing [128] or information processing
capabilities [13] as success factors in cooperations.
Cohen’s f 2 was used to further evaluate the effect
sizes, and the predictive relevance using the Stone-

Geisser Criteria Q2 for the latent variables of the
structural model [45, 130]. The effect size f 2 describes
the increase in R 2 relative to the proportion of variance
of the endogenous construct that remains unexplained
[25]. As can be seen in Table 5 for the endogenous
variable performance, the f 2 of the transaction-based
governance construct is close to medium. The f 2 of
relational based governance signifies large effects;
while the f 2 of environmental uncertainty exhibits
only small effects [25].
To evaluate the prediction relevance of the structural
model, a blindfolding procedure with an omission
distance of 5 was applied [58]. The resulting Q 2
values for the endogenous constructs are all larger

latent variable scores
Construct

2

Q

2

f

PER

95% confidence interval
Mean

STDV

lower

upper

AAS

0.666

2.00

1.04

0.85

2.19

ICT

0.714

1.90

1.26

1.03

2.14

COM

0.651

1.56

0.70

0.57

1.69

EMB

0.715

1.69

0.80

0.65

1.84

TRU

0.650

2.06

0.97

0.79

2.24

TRA

0.484

0.119

1.97

0.95

0.77

2.14

SOC

0.455

0.927

1.74

0.66

0.54

1.87

ENV

0.731

0.073

3.47

1.66

1.35

3.77

of the structural model [41]. Table 5 also reports the
latent variable scores and respective 95% confidence
intervals.
5

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

The results of this research provide empirical
evidence that environmental uncertainty has a strong
negative effect on the performance of horizontal
cooperations, and positively moderates the effect of
transactional and relational governance mechanisms.
5.1

Environmental uncertainty and
performance
Hypothesis H1, proposing a direct negative impact
of environmental uncertainty on cooperating
performance, is supported. The economic environment
firms are operating in naturally has a significant
effect on the performance. When uncertainties
in institutional settings exist, the performance of
cooperations is significantly negatively impacted. This
is confirmed by the given structural equation model
that identifies a strong negative effect (b = -.571). As
the study focuses on Africa and the Middle East as
representing regions for emerging economies, there
are certain peculiarities to be taken into account. In
comparison to other emerging economies, there is
also the influence of the recent economic growth to
be considered. Increase in geographic diversity as well
as improvement of infrastructural and political issues
lead to new opportunities but at the same time pose
challenges for the firms. This is due to the enhanced
momentum in the market and the corresponding
volatility. For the validation of the findings, personal
interviews with key informants from three companies
represented in the sample were conducted. The first
interview partner from the sample was the president
of a LSP (company A), responsible for managing
a network of LSP partners that cover the African
continent. The second interview partner was the
managing director (MD) of a LSP (company B) based
in Oman that cooperates with several LSP’s in other
Middle Eastern countries as well as one LSP in Africa
and two in Europe. A third interview was conducted
with a board member of a globally operating LSP
(company C) that has extensive relationships with
local LSPs in both Africa and the Middle East. That
interview partner was also part of the expert panel
that reviewed the survey instrument. The three
interview partners were confronted with the specific
findings of the analysis and were asked to comment
on these, based on their personal experience. All three
interview partners agreed that unstable institutions
make it little attractive for LSPs to operate in these
countries. In particular, they mentioned that the
contingency costs for the constant monitoring of the

13

uncertainties increase in exchange relationships in
emerging countries.
Notwithstanding, there is evidence for an increase
of the relationships quality’s effect on performance the
more environmental uncertainty increases, as former
research shows [23]. This implies that maintaining a
close interorganizational relationship can be beneficial
in uncertain environments despite the rising costs. A
casedependent treatment of the cost-benefit ratio is
suggested.
5.2

Transactional governance and the
moderating effect of uncertainty
A further finding in the sample of companies is that
transactional governance by itself has a detrimental
effect on the cooperation performance (b = -.199).
Therefore, Hypothesis 2a must be rejected. This is
surprising, given the fact that most prior research on
transactional mechanisms found them to be beneficial
to the performance of cooperations [e.g. 78, 82,
125]. A possible explanation is the nature of these
exchanges. As previous research found horizontal
relationships to be more conflicting in nature than
vertical relationships [117]. In cases of environmental
stability, contracts may be required to govern these
exchanges. The interview partners generally agreed
that investments into relationship-specific assets,
particularly ICT, are cost and time intensive and
frequently subject to conflict between cooperation
partners. Hence, instead of a positive effect on the
performance, transactional mechanisms can actually
display damaging effects. Further, LSPs are driven by
process specific know-how. Hence, interpersonal ties
rather than transactional mechanisms usually govern
the exchanges between them.
Supporting Hypothesis 2b, the empirical results show
that economic uncertainty significantly moderates the
effectiveness of transactional governance (b = .579)
on the cooperation performance. Only when the
environment is uncertain, transactional governance
mechanisms do create strong positive effects on
the performance of horizontal cooperations. This
can be explained by the nature of the two examined
dimensions of transactional-based governance. They
permit operational flexibility and faster information
exchange between partners, thus ensuring a constant
adaption to the changing environment. The fast
exchange of information powered by aligned ICT
systems provides cooperation partners the flexibility
to swiftly adapt to changing economic conditions.
Further, joint ICT and asset investments enable LSP
partnerships to optimize and streamline the processes.
This is in line with findings by Wong et al. [154],
who found that mechanisms such as simplification
of procedures and processes are an effective tool to
mitigate uncertainties in unpredictable environments.
So can, according to the interview partners,
space ensure a high level of service quality, even if
external conditions vary. For a single LSP, warehouse
space is an inflexible asset as it is difficult to reallocate
to other locations if the economic settings change or
transport demand diminishes in a region. However,
with cooperation partners a LSP does not need to
lease an entire warehouse but can lease space in a
warehouse operated by one of its cooperation partners.
This provides the individual LSP with operational
flexibility and an incentive to maintain cooperative
ties to other LSPs. As mentioned before, LSP in the
African and Middle Eastern region are often used by
large European LSPs not owning subsidiaries in the
respective region. This comes along with opportunities
for the small LSPs as well as the dependency from
their European contracting authority. In the following
high flexibility as can be gained by transaction-based
governance is advantageous.
The results are in line with these statements as
well as findings of Wong et al. [154], who state that,
due to the collaborative relationships amongst them,
LSPs can maintain an operational flexibility in
varying economic conditions. The strong moderating
effect of environmental uncertainty was reaffirmed
by the interview partners, as all three agreed that
transactional governance mechanisms are beneficial
and referred to them as an “anchor” that stabilizes
the exchange relationships in a constantly changing
environment.
The relationship between transaction-specific
investments and environmental uncertainty is also
shown in Figure 4, which highlights the slopes for low
(β = -.778), medium (β = -.199) and high (β = .380)
levels of the moderating effects of environmental
uncertainty on the transactional governance. In case
of low environmental uncertainty (one standard

deviation below the mean factor score), transactionspecific investments display a strong negative effect
on the performance. Even when the environmental
uncertainty is moderate (mean factor score), it
negatively affects the effectiveness of transactionspecific investments. Only when uncertainty is high
(one standard deviation above the mean factor score),
the negative impacts tilts over and transaction-specific
investments show a positive effect on the performance
of horizontal cooperations.
Joint investments into assets (b = .650) present a
slightly higher impact on the transactional governance
mechanisms than investments in ICT (b =.540). The
interviewee from company A explained this fact
with the relative ease of implementation compared
to ICT investments. Joint investments into assets can
mean to simply share an employee, a truck or some
warehouse space with other LSPs, while investments
into joint ICT are more complex as they require
common systems and EDI interfaces. Company B
shared a similar view, as they had initially only little
ICT interfaces to cooperation partners. However, over
time and due to increased customer demand, common
EDI interfaces with other LSPs were established.
The interview partner from company C, in contrast,
indicated that his company builds up extensive ICT
links in the form of EDI connections and interfaces
to the transportation system of cooperation partners.
According to the interviewee, this is mostly due
to the global network of that LSP and the resulting
requirements for data transparency.
This is supported by a current study by Krishnan
et al. [73] investigating the interrelation of
environmental and behavioral uncertainty with
under high environmental uncertainty. Therefore,
according mechanisms can be of major help for
firms under uncertain conditions in responding to
the environmental impacts they are facing. As a
supplementary measure, Raue and Wieland [115]
found that different transactional mechanisms can act
as substitutes when firms aim at accessing tangible
resources through cooperation. In case of intangible
resources being the subject of interest, the investigated
transactional mechanisms are merely complements.
In both cases, transactional mechanisms support the
firms’ cooperative relation.
5.3

Relational governance and the moderating
effect of uncertainty
Relational-based governance mechanisms exhibit
little to no effect on competitive success. (b = .026).
Therefore, Hypothesis 3a must be rejected. The
insignificant effectiveness of relational governance
might be for the characteristics of the LSP industry,
where the process know-how is easy to absorb and
imitate by cooperation partners. This reduces the
effectiveness of relational governance to hinder
opportunism and drive cooperation performance.
The interviewee from company A confirmed this, by
citing that his company employs multiple governance
forms, ranging from transactional to relational. Based
on his experience relational mechanisms alone are not
adequate to deter opportunism.
As the unified relational construct contains three
elements, they might act as substitutes, thus reducing
the initial positive effect of relational governance. The
interview partner from company C pointed out that
commitment may also have detrimental effects, as it
might attach his company to an inferior cooperation
partner. However, if the external conditions are

15

uncertain, relational governance becomes much more
important. This is due to the fact that legal contracts
as governance method cannot cover all aspects that
might arise in uncertain conditions [21].
This is in line with Hypothesis 3b, which states that
environmental uncertainty positively moderates the
effectiveness of relational governance mechanisms on
the cooperation performance (b = .616). Social ties such
as trust become main control mechanisms in uncertain
conditions that arise in emerging economies, as they
support cooperation partners to manage unforeseeable
situations [37]. The interviews confirm this strong
moderating effect, since it was explicitly stated by the
interview partners that in their experience uncertain
conditions necessitate personal contacts to manage
and govern relationships. According to company B,
relational ties form immaterial assets that hold their
partnerships together and are much more flexible than
contracts or material assets. Differences in the strategy
of the cooperation or operational changes can be solved
by personal dialogue rather than time-consuming
renegotiations of contracts. The interview partner
from company C further mentioned that it regularly
hosts conferences with all its cooperation partners
to exchange required information and strengthen the
relational ties among all cooperating LSPs.
The effects are also displayed in Figure 5, which
shows the relationship of relational governance and
different levels of environmental uncertainty similar
to Figure 4. At low levels of environmental uncertainty
(one standard deviation below the mean factor score)
relational governance has a detrimental effect on the
performance (β = .590), while at medium levels of
uncertainty (mean factor score) relational governance
shows no significant effect (β = .026). Similar to the
results displayed in Figure 4, only at high levels of
uncertainty (one standard deviation above the mean

in horizontal cooperations.
All three dimensions of relational governance
included in the model exhibit strong positive effects
(commitment (b = .337), embeddedness (b = .464),
trust (b = .409)) on the aggregated relational
mechanisms construct. All three interview partners
could support this finding. Particularly the interview
partners from company A and B stressed the fact that
embeddedness and trust can act as substitutes for more
formal governance methods or even can make legal
contracts obsolete. While the interview partner from
company C put forward compliances requirements
that make further governance methods mandatory, he
confirmed that as logistics services are mainly people
driven, embeddedness and trust play a vital role in
exchange relationships. The commitment to partners
was seen as an important fact by all three interview
partners, yet to a lesser extent than the other two
aspects of relational governance. The unified relational
mechanisms construct has no significant impact on
the performance, thus the second hypothesis must be
rejected.
Opposing to these findings derived from the
captured data former research found evidence that
environmental uncertainty hinders firms to make use of
trust-based governance mechanisms [73]. As the study
at hand focused mainly on the interplay of behavioral
and environmental uncertainty, it might have
happened, that relational mechanisms are relatively
ineffective under high environmental uncertainty
compared to transactional mechanisms. Still they can
constitute a viable alternative solution. Another study,
which focuses on new business ventures in a transition
economy, namely China, concludes that the ability to
benefit from business relations moderates the negative
effects of environmental uncertainty and thus supports
firms to grow by enhancing their performance [127].
In regards to the control variable, there was a slight
positive impact on the performance by the joint
usage of relational and transactional mechanisms.
Previous studies examining the interaction of these
two governance mechanisms came to opposing
conclusions, with some studies finding a support
for them acting as complements [86] while other
results found them acting as substitutes [156]. If
transactional mechanisms are reinforced by relational
mechanisms such as trust and close personal ties,
they are usually more effective, as they are designed
with the continuation of the cooperation in mind.
These findings are however not surprising, given
the fact that transactional mechanisms are made up
by the construct’s relationship-specific investments
into assets and ICT, which usually require trust and
commitment by individual partners towards the
cooperation.

In the experience of the interview partner from
company B and consistent with his assertions on
the observed effects for transactional governance
mechanisms, horizontal LSP cooperations initially
do not require heavy investments at the beginning
of a cooperation, while at later stages the need for
transactional based governance increases. Over
time, as the number of cooperation fields is extended
the number of contact partners grows and contacts
become more impersonal. Accordingly, the need
for transactional-based governance increases.
Consequently, and in line with the interview
partners’ opinion, the joint practice of transactional
and relational governance is most effective, as an
individual LSP operates cooperations at different
maturity stages with various cooperation partners.
This applies especially in the case of African and
Middle Eastern LSP, as the economy is in a transition
phase, including market volatility, growth and changes
in the market environment. This development is a
driver for joint usage of transactional and relational
governance mechanisms as aforementioned.
6

CONCLUSION AND FURTHER
RESEARCH

The empirical results of the presented study indicate
that environmental uncertainty has a strong negative
effect on performance for cooperations between
LSPs. In particular, the findings suggest that due
to the characteristics of horizontal cooperations,
relational and transactional mechanisms show
no, or even a detrimental effect at low levels of
uncertainty. This effect tilts over at high level of
uncertainty, where environmental uncertainty would
suppress high performance of individual LSPs.
This finding is in stark contrast to previous studies
on vertical cooperations, which do not find such a
strong dependence of governance instruments on the
economic environment.
The theoretical and practical contribution of the
study at hands is based in its explorative character
and focus on a topic of increasing importance. As the
spreading of production sites all over the world along
with globally distributed customers for reasons of cost
or quality control is gaining more and more weight in
the future, the sector of logistics comes under pressure
to fulfill increased demands. To meet these demands
cooperations are a key success factor. Especially
under the conditions typical for emerging markets,
firms can profit from the synergies realized through
cooperations. As outlined before, research on vertical
cooperations is at a satisfactory level. In contrast, there
are hardly scientific results to be found on horizontal
cooperation, which is particularly important to
strengthen a certain segment of the industry namely
competing firms operating at the same level in the
it widens the understanding of firms’ performance
changes due to individual management decisions
as well as their combined effects. Especially the
latter is of major interest under consideration of the
inconclusive findings of previous research in regard of
interaction effects between relational and transactional
governance mechanisms.
6.1
Managerial & theoretical implications
As the flow of commodities spreads to new markets
and LSPs from emerging economies extend their
service range, horizontal relationships with other
LSPs become increasingly critical to a firm’s success
in these economies. Subsequently small-sized LSPs,
which are typically found in emerging economies,
are more likely to bundle their resources and tender
on larger contracts that can normally only be tendered
for by larger sized LSPs [142]. The results suggest that
executives of LSPs in emerging economies should
consider environmental contingencies when making
decisions about using transactional and relational
governance mechanisms to manage collaborations. In
particular, as the perceived external risks are manifold,
executives should emphatically use trust, commitment
and embeddedness to open up communication and
ensure the joint development of inter-personal and
inter-firm ties among participants.
Since relational mechanisms and contracts can be
viewed as substitutes [146], executives are unlikely to
rely upon contracts in highly uncertain environments.
At the same time, joint investments can act as a
substitute for written agreements, as they increase
the break up cost in case of opportunistic behavior.
Executives should thus invest into the connectivity
of their respective ICT systems. In addition, the joint
utilization of assets like truck capacity or warehouse
space signals a dedication to the relationship and
acts as cohesive factor for horizontal relationships.
However, if the economic conditions surrounding the
horizontal cooperation are stable, executives should
consider other governance mechanisms like written
agreements and contracts, as transaction-specific
investments and relational forms are not sufficient to
suppress opportunism in this context.
Another lesson learned from this study is that the
differentiation between the two examined governance
mechanisms does not significantly affect the success
of these relationships. As LSPs aim to decrease
opportunism and improve cooperation performance,
the executives should consider using relational
mechanisms alongside transactional mechanisms.
However, as most LSPs operating in emerging
economies are small in size and cash restricted,
executives might not have the financial means or
manpower for far-reaching alignment of their ICT
systems or assets. Consequently, relational governance
aspects seem more viable under such circumstances.
However, as the economies and institutions progress

17

and become more stable, other means of governance
might become more applicable. As many LSPs
operating in emerging economies rapidly extend
their business relationships to more industrialized
countries, they might move towards a more legalbased way of governance instead of utilizing relational
and transactional governance mechanisms.
When focusing less on direct application of the
results in form of managerial implications but more
on implications for theory, namely transaction cost
theory and social exchange theory, some light is shed
on the complex relation between diverse governance
mechanisms and firms’ performance under the
influence of environmental uncertainty. As the
results of the study show, transactional governance
mechanisms as well as relational mechanisms do
not show positive effects under low environmental
uncertainty concerning firm performance. This is
in line with transaction cost theory, which assumes
a rise in dependence between firms when high
transaction-specific costs occur. Hereby, the incentive
for opportunistic behavior would also rise. As the aim
of economically motivated organizations like firms
is the restraint of opportunism, transactions with
high specificity are avoided as a rule. Only under the
assumption of high environmental uncertainty, which
in transaction cost theory induces stronger endeavor
for integration activities, an according reaction
among the sample was observed. As the integration
in the form of transaction comes with the detriment
of losing flexibility and binding capital, the degree
to which transactional governance is employed is
kept low as long as possible. Thus, the study provides
empirically substantiated proof for the influencing
character of environmental uncertainty when it
comes to the application of transactional governance
mechanisms. Similar results could be observed for
relational mechanisms, belonging to the field of social
exchange theory. This implies that such governance
mechanisms are also used to a higher degree mainly
due to the pressure originating from the environmental
uncertainty. As former research showed the effectivity
of relational governance in principal, the study at
hand extends this knowledge and shows the increase
in performance under uncertainty when applying
relational governance mechanisms. Even though,
an interaction effect of transactional and relational
mechanisms could not be determined, it becomes
clear, that effectivity of both individually is increased
under environmental uncertainty. These findings could
be the first step to support the explanation approach
in social exchange theory, stating that relational
governance develops only slowly over a period. Thus,
for relatively young horizontal cooperations the
transactional mechanisms are the preferred instrument
as governance mechanism while in older relationships
The results of this study have some limitations that
may be worthwhile to explore in future research. In
particular, only five different governance constructs
were investigated, of which two can be allocated to
transactional mechanisms and three to relational
mechanisms. This leaves space for future research to
explore the influence of other governance constructs
that are either related to transaction cost theory or
social exchange theory such as contracts or previous
business relations. In addition, governance mechanisms
based on other theories might be worthwhile to
explore. A limitation of the research study is that
the data collection was restricted to an emerging
economies setting and is therefore a limiting factor
for the generalization of the findings. For example,
the impact of the different governance mechanisms
on the performance of horizontal LSP cooperations
might differ between emerging economies and more
industrialized and mature economies. Future research
thus may extend this study to more industrialized
regions, to ensure the generalizability of the results
and to detect potential effects specific for emerging
economies.
Although a broad aspect of emerging economies
was covered, this approach has the limitation that
relational governance mechanisms may depend on
the specific culture inherent to the persons involved,
or the specific institutional setting these persons are
acting in. For example, different participants from the
sample operate in different institutional settings and
hence build a heterogeneous group. Same applies for
the issue with differences in response behavior due
to cultural differences among the participants of the
study. Institutional setting and culture, both might lead
to a bias but this is one of the limitations characteristic
for a multi-country study, which often is a crosscultural study at the same time. To remedy this an
avenue for future research may be to examine whether
the empirical results for the governance mechanisms
identified in this paper are generally applicable by
examining differences between two or more countryby-country samples in Africa and the Middle East.
Additionally, it would be interesting to examine if
the respective impact of relational and transactional
governance mechanisms on the performance differ
between horizontal LSP cooperations and horizontal
cooperations in other industries.
Other starting points for future research might be
in-depth case studies. Those, for example, would
help to further understand how specific facets of
environmental uncertainty affect the different
governance mechanisms. Such a more narrow
research design would also allow for specific
practical recommendations applicable for firms
showing sufficient match to the surveyed firms for
example in regards to size or managerial structures.
Further research using longitudinal data would also
be a worthwhile approach to examine the impact of

environmental uncertainty on the different governance
mechanisms over time. In particular, for the relational
aspects of governance this approach could provide
promising insights.