Codes of conduct

Best environment practice
in this area

Ecolabels

Environment Management
Systems (EMSs)

Ecologic
indicators

performance

Purpose
In order to show observance
of the basic principles by a
sustainable and environment
friendly business
In order to take actual steps
for
improving
the
company’s
ecologic
performance
In order to ensure the
ecologic performance of
business in close connection
to the set out criteria and for
informing the client
In order to guide the
company’s
environment
performance and for its
continuous improvement in
close connection to the
planned strategy
In order to set out and
communicate the company’s
ecologic performance

Examples
Agenda 21 for the tourism
and
travels
industry;
WTTC
environment
Guidebook
Electricity
and
water
saving
approaches;
diminishing the quantity of
waste and its adequate
management
European ecolabel, Green
Globe 21, Öko-ProofBetrieb,
Spanish
ecolabeling systems
ISO 14001; European
Regulation EMAS

Total electricity and water
consumption;
resulting
quantities of waste per type

Source: Ayuso, S., 2006. Adoption of Voluntary Environmental Tools for Sustainable
Tourism: Analyzing the Experience of Spanish Hotels. Corporate Social Responsibility and
Environmental Management, p. 209
This paper focuses on the European ecolabel as part of the set of tools presented above, and
on researching the attitude of hotel service consumers within the Crowne Plaza Hotel,
Bucharest.
The system was implemented by Regulation (EEC) no. 880/ 1992 and altered by
Regulation (EC) no. 1980/ 2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
revised EU scheme on the award of ecolabel. According to the Regulation no. 1980/ 2000
transposed to the Romanian legislation by the Decision of the Government of Romania no.
189/ 2002, replaced subsequently by the Decision of the Government of Romania no. 236/
2007, 24 categories of products in various activity domains and two activities in the
services sector (tourist accommodation and camping services) have been identified. Given
the passing of a new European regulation on the Community ecolabel, under no. 66/ 2010,
the Decision of the Government of Romania no. 661/ 2011 on setting out some measures
for ensuring the national implementation of that regulation was passed, as well as the Order
of the minister of environment and forest no. 2129/ 2011 on approving the nominal making
up of the EU Ecolabel Commission.
From the point of view of the subject approached next, ecolabel for accommodation
services, the applicable legislation is made up of Decision of European Commission no.
the accommodation services for tourists, and Decision of the Government of Romania no.
1855/ 2005 on setting out the criteria for awarding the ecolabel to accommodation services
for tourists.
The ecolabel is a facultative scheme created to encourage the companies to sell goods /
services with low impact on the environment and to support the European consumers,
public and private clients, to identify them easily. No matter the group of products /
services, the environment requirements refer to the quality of air, quality of water,
protection of soil, diminishing the generated waste quantity, saving electricity, preserving
the natural resources, preventing the global warming phenomenon, protecting the ozone
layer, environment security, noise, and biodiversity. Ecolabeling is meant to limit the use of
substances having negative effects on water, air, and soil and / or posing a high risk of
producing cancer, allergy, etc. effects. Practically, the criteria that are the basis of granting
the European ecolabel encourage the applying of the best practice for environment and
human health protection, as well as products recycling. The ecologic criteria for a group of
products are valid for a period between 3 and 5 years, and revising them takes place
according to the technical progress of products.
From the perspective of accommodation services, the ecolabel refers mainly to four major
aspects: electricity, water, waste, and other services. It is attempted the stimulation of
diminishing the electricity and water consumptions, as well as the waste quantity resulting
from the operational activity. At the same time, using environment friendly substances and
developing an efficient activity are supported. For example, the water and electricity
consumption for each tourist is above the regular household consumption. Thus, according
to the data collected from several hundred tourism accommodation units in Central and
Western Europe, the average water consumption for an occupied room was calculated to
394 liters, as against an average of the highest performance 25% of the business in the
analyzed domain of 213 liters (EEA, 2007). These values show that there is a high potential
for diminishing the resources consumption without affecting the quality of services
provided, thus decreasing also the impact of tourism activity on the environment.
1. Research methodology
At international level, studies were made that show the connection between the ecolabel
and the clients’ consumption behavior. After staying in hotels holding Green Key EcoLabel certificates, 69% of the Dutch tourists would be willing to pay more for benefiting of
the services of hotels that implemented the ecolabel (Chafe, 2005). Also among Dutch
tourists, 86% would prefer a star classification system that would combine the ecologic
performance and quality of services. Over 62% of the Italian tourists and 42% of the
German tourists believe that the ecologic performance is a key factor for a successful
vacation. At the same time, over 90% of the Italian tourists are in favor of an ecolabeling
system of hotel business. The data above emphasize the close connection between the
number of ecolabels awarded at European level, on countries, and the acknowledgment
level among tourists. Thus, according to the information of the European Commission, in
Italy 9067 ecolabel licenses are active, which is less than half the total number of licenses
issued. The new social and economic conditions seem to favor an attitude shift towards the
sustainable environment friendly business, in all activity domains. The accommodation

and ecologic reasons.
In 2012, 17754 licenses to use the ecolabels had been awarded in Europe, of which 356 for
accommodation services, which represents 2% of the total number of licenses awarded. In
Romania, in 2013, 23 licenses had been issued, of which three for accommodation services.
The three hotels that received them are Saturn Hotel of Saturn that received its license in
2008, Crowne Plaza Hotel of Bucharest that received its license in 2009, and Piatra
Soimului Villa of Sinaia that received its license in 2011. Like this, from the point of view
of interest for acquiring the ecolabel, Romania is on one of the last places, but the weight of
licenses granted for accommodation services surpasses by far the European average.
We performed the research among the clients of one of the three hotels holding an ecolabel,
Crowne Plaza Hotel of Bucharest. The purpose was to study the perception of clients
concerning the ecolabel for accommodation services, as well as the manner in which the
ecolabel influences the choice of hotel. In these circumstances, a series of objectives were
pursued:
• Knowing the general opinion of clients in connection to the ecolabel;
• Identifying the reaction of clients in connection to the ecolabel of the hotel chosen;
• Determining the manner in which the ecolabel influences the behavior of clients and
their purchase decision;
• Identifying all reasons for which a certain hotel is preferred to others.
The working assumptions, which were formulated according to the purpose of the research
and pursued objectives, are:
H1: The most important factor when choosing a hotel is the quality of services;
H2: Most clients never heard of the ecolabel;
H3: Minimum 30% of the subjects believe that the ecolabel enhances the confidence
in the services provided by the hotel;
H4: Most clients believe that acquiring the ecolabel should be seen in prices and
would pay more for such hotel services.
The research was made by a structured questionnaire relying on questions having a preset
formulation and order. The poll was unhidden, the respondents being aware of the purpose
of research. According to the time criterion, the research was transversal, offering the
possibility to study the connection between certain selected variables. In this case, this was
a classic research according to the communication manner with the respondents, the
questionnaires being administered in person. Because we wanted it to be an exploratory
research that would ensure better knowing and understanding the main aspects considered,
we chose a mainly qualitative approach. From the perspective of marketing researches,
upon considering the size of market, it can be said that a pilot study was made on a semirepresentative small size sample: 40 questionnaires were applied after considering a
representative sample of 385 persons. Next to their intrinsic value, the results can be
deemed as having a preliminary character and that is why, they can be the basis for
designing future research.

After collecting all data and processing them statistically, contradicting results were
acquired, which confirm only some of the working assumptions.
The main reasons for choosing a hotel are quality of services (35%), followed by price
(22%) and reputation of the hotel (17%), provided that the respondents were given the
possibility of multiple response (figure no. 1). Given the limitation of options to a response
variant, the quality of services is the determining factor for choosing a hotel, with 70% of
the responses, the 30% difference being represented by the rate level. Crowne Plaza, as a
five star hotel located in the capital city of Romania, focuses on the business segment,
which is much more sensitive to quality than to the level of room rates. Clients are willing
to pay more for image, comfort, prestige, as determining factors of business success (Lupu,
2010).

Quality of services
Price
Fame
Recommendations
Classification category
Others

Figure no. 1: Importance granted to factors of choosing the accommodation facility
Source: original, based on the research
In order to verify the second working assumption, the respondents were asked if they had
ever heard of the ecolabel indicated by the European Parliament for hotel service and
subsequently, if they knew that Crowne Plaza Hotel was the only one in Bucharest holding
such a certificate. Most of the respondents did not hear of the ecolabel (75%) or were
unaware of what it was (10%). The remaining 15%, who knew what the ecolabel was, were
aware that the hotel under analysis held a license to use it (figure no. 2). Considering this, it
could be stated that the level of knowing the ecolabel is very low, on one hand due to the
small number of licenses granted in Romania and, on the other hand, due to the low interest
showed by clients to environment matters. Still, it is encouraging that the 15% who heard of
the ecolabel were also aware that Crowne Plaza Hotel held a license to use it. The result
confirms the second working assumption.

No
What is the ecolabel?

Figure no. 2: Level of acknowledging the ecolabel
Source: original, based on the research
After supplying minimal explanations in connection to the ecolabel and the corresponding
measures, the subjects had to indicate the effects of applying it on their relation to the hotel,
in one response. By 30% of the responses, two attributes were equal: “it improves the
hotel’s reputation” (working assumption 3) and “it enhances the confidence in the hotel”,
being followed by traits such as “it is a guarantee of the services provided” and “it is only
an image advantage”, with 20% for each (please refer to figure no. 3).

Enhances the confidence
in the hotel
Is a guarantee for the
services provided
Improves the reputation of
the hotel
Is just an image advantage
Has no significant impact

Figure no. 3: Attributes of ecolabel impact
Source: original, based on the research

tends to associate the ecolabel to the general image of the hotel and not to the quality of
services. Confidence, fame, and image are defining aspects for building the loyalty of
clients on a long term. Ecolabel contributes to acquiring the loyalty of clients, as part of a
continuous and diversified public relations process. Considering the economic point of
view, the ecolabel stands out as part of the public relation activities and it is one of the
cheapest means of building the loyalty of clients, by comparison to a series of advertising
and public relation-specific activities. The costs involved for acquiring the license to use
the ecolabel are EUR 300-1,300, exclusive of the costs for testing or checking the product
in the process of assessing its performance. An annual charge of 0.15% of the sales volume
of product or service that acquired the European ecolabel adds to this.
It can be deemed that, although it is a viable marketing tool, the ecolabel is insufficiently
advertised among clients. That is why the actions of companies holding the ecolabel should
focus on advertising it to clients, as well as on informing them in connection to the
advantage of purchasing products and services holding ecologic certificates. However, the
purchase decision does not depend only on economical arguments, but also on some clear
ones concerning price and / or quality. In connection to the ecolabel – price ratio, although
half of the respondents declared that holding the certificate should be seen in the rates of
the hotel, only 15% would be willing to pay 5% more for such services (please refer to
figure no. 4).

Yes
No

Figure nr. 4: Reaction to the 5% increase of rates of hotel services by the ecolabel
Source: original, based on the research
The finding is that the working assumption 4 is not confirmed. On one hand, the opinions in
connection to the ecolabel being seen in the prices are equally shared, the respondents
having opposite opinions. On the other hand, only 15% would be willing to pay a 5%
higher rate. This is the same percentage as that of subjects, who know what the ecolabel is
and that the Crowne Plaza Hotel holds a license to use it. Given this, two types of clients
can be identified: some, who are informed, know more about the topic under scrutiny, are

higher, and most clients, who are not informed on this topic.
Due to the existence of these conditions, the importance aspects on the ecolabel shift from
the advantage of holding it to the importance of communicating this differentiation issue to
clients. Although the clients are gradually more interested in the environment matters, only
holding the ecological certification, without efficient communication, solves just minimally
the matter of differentiation of the competitor companies and building loyalty for clients.
Orientation towards efficiently communicating the advantage of using not only the
accommodation services with ecolabel, but also all products and services having such
certification will increase their reputation in time.
In the demographic distribution of subjects on genders, we chose a 50 – 50 ratio, and we
attempted to cover all age segments in the 18 – 70 years old interval among the clients of
Crowne Plaza Hotel (please refer to figure no. 5).

Figure no. 5: Distribution of respondents on age segments (years old)
Source: original, based on the research
Those presented previously indicate a low information degree on the ecolabel of the clients
of a hotel already holding a certificate, despite that a “green corner” was arranged, flyers
were put in rooms, and the employees were trained to present the significance of the
approach made by the hotel. Certainly, the communication efforts concerning this
advantage must be expanded as duration, upon considering the period prior to the arrival of
the client to the hotel, and multiplied by various actions, such as the next: newsletters sent
to the addresses of clients in the database, using the ecolabel logo on all documents printed
by the hotel, information in connection to adopting some precise ecologic measures
included in the file from each room, and presenting brief information on the company’s
website. As indicator of the flawed communication in this domain, Crowne Plaza Hotel did
not advertise that it won 3rd place in the “Green Business Index 2012” general classification
that assessed the environment-related responsibility of all companies in Romania.

The results of the research confirm the situation existing not only in Romania, but also in
most countries of the European Union. Except for Italy that holds over half of the licenses
to use the ecolabel, in most countries the level of knowing it is relatively low. After a
hesitant start, even if the number of licenses awarded in the recent years grew, a long period
is necessary for reaching satisfactory results.
The ecolabel can be an advantage for a company’s image and a differentiation element
between rival companies. Gradually, as it will expand and become general, these
advantages might diminish, but the loyalty component built on this basis will remain.
However, for now, many Romanian companies, mainly the small and medium ones, lack
the orientation towards building a long-term relation with clients. Confidence and meeting
the clients’ expectations are key elements for the business of the third millennium.
Although the costs connected to the ecolabel are not high, when compared to other
environment tools, and are much lower than the expenses involved in the sale promotion
and building the clients’ loyalty activities, the ecolabel seems to remain the attribute of
large companies having a healthy environment policy. And it appears, for the time being,
that only they have a long-term vision on business. It must be remembered that the longterm vision and implementation are the vital elements of the sustainable development. The
attempts to limit the negative impact on the environment must not be seen in an
undemanding manner, as an expense element. The savings made, as well as building the
loyalty of certain client categories, can become a source of income on a long term. The
business profitability, which is closely connected to correctly approaching the environment
issues, is the key to sustainable development at macro-economic level.

