

1 Introduction
Companies are more than ever exposed to a diverse set of
risks in operating their supply chains [1–3]. Understanding
how to perform risk management within the supply chain is
important and has high priority [4]. From a traditional
perspective, companies’ risk is usually considered in a
purely economic mode, particularly as the risk of potential
asset value losses. Considering sustainability management,
an extension of a company’s targets and responsibilities is
implied [5]. Therefore, social and environmental risks need
to be included into the risk assessment besides economical
risks. Related arguments are frequently made on a conceptual level in respective sustainable supply chain management literature [6].
The clothing industry with its globally fragmented and
dynamic supply chains is frequently a target in media
campaigns and NGO initiatives [7, 8]. There are many
reports on unacceptable working conditions and environmental or ethical burdens through production and along the
supply chain. Unacceptable working conditions concerning
child labour, safety issues in factories, forced labour, and
low minimum wages are issues as present as environmental
concerns [9]. Mainly, branded apparel distributors, such as
Adidas, Benetton, C&A, Levi Strauss, and Nike, have been
in the press in recent years [10]. These are indications of
environmental and social risks in globally fragmented
supply chains. Given the related and frequent news coverage, companies are demanded to perform risk management for sustainable supply chains, thereby also accounting

back to the already mentioned literature on sustainable
supply chain management.
Even though conceptualisations of sustainable supply
chain management suggest supplier management and risk
management for sustainable products and processes as
substantial for companies [6, 11], research on how companies are or should be performing management of environmental and social risks in their supply chain has so far
been neglected.
This leads to the aim of this study. It is to analyse both
why companies are performing risk management of environmental and social risks in their supply chain and what
kind of action they are taking.
The paper is organised as follows: In Sect. 2, a literature
review on supply chain risk management and sustainable
supply chain management allows the identiﬁcation of
overlaps among the two ﬁelds. On this basis, a conceptual
model is developed. The model was tested in an empirical
study. The research method is brieﬂy outlined in Sect. 3.
First, a series of expert interviews was conducted followed
by a survey. The data were analysed using structural
equation modelling (SEM). The ﬁndings of the survey are
outlined and then discussed in Sect. 4. This allows the
contribution of the paper in operationalising a sustainable
supply chain risk management which is described in
Sect. 5. The paper ends with a brief conclusion.

2 Theoretical background and hypothesis
development
2.1 Literature review
Among the lines of research in supply chain management,
both risk [1–3, 12] and sustainability [6, 11, 13] are among
those topics receiving increasing attention. As a starting
point, we take a brief look at the term risk and supply chain
risk management. Then, we address the literature on sustainable supply chain management and subsequently assess
how risk-related issues could be integrated.
For the term ‘‘risk’’, a generally accepted deﬁnition does
not exist [3, 12]. Traditionally, risk is understood as potential economical losses or chances. In recent literature,
there is a broader perspective. Risk is understood as an
effect that prevents organisations to achieve its predeﬁned
targets [14]. This perspective allows extending risk from a
mainly economical perspective to a sustainability perspective. Yet, these targets are extended and complemented
by social and environmental targets in a sustainable context. Because much of the value creation is taking place in
supply chain, the focus is also expanded from the focal
company to the overall supply chain.

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:2

The literature on supply chain risk management has
recently expanded, such as in the form of review papers
(e.g. the recent ones by [3, 15]) and empirical research [16–
18]. In the literature on supply chain risk management (for
additional reviews, see, for example, [1, 2, 19, 20]), authors
point to the fact that it is almost taken for granted that
companies implement such measures to prevent any unforeseen disruptions in the supply chain [21]. We refer to
the deﬁnition of supply chain risk by Pfohl et al. [3]:
‘‘Supply chain risks involve risks that can be attributed to
disturbance of ﬂow within the goods, information, and ﬁnancial network, as well as the social and institutional
networks. They might have negative effects on the goal
achievement of single companies and the whole supply
chain, respectively, with regard to end customer value,
costs, time, or quality’’. Implementing related measures for
identifying, managing, and mitigating leads then to a supply chain risk management.
It is interesting to note that none of the review papers
mentioned addresses the aspects of the natural environment
as well as social issues. In some cases, aspects of natural
environmental risks are mentioned as a side issue. Kleindorfer and Saad [1] refer to natural and man-made disasters, whereas Pfohl et al. [3] and Rao and Goldsby [20]
refer to social uncertainty, which are derived as a consequence of stakeholder demands. An indication of a ﬁeld of
research becoming more established is oftentimes that related literature reviews emerge. Since 2007, there has been
a series of related literature reviews on sustainable supply
chain management [6, 13, 22]. In many of these reviews as
well as in an earlier set of papers [23, 24], risk issues play a
central role. Extending the conventional risk perspective,
this includes risk aspects from environmental and social
issues. On the environmental side, such issues include, for
example, the release of hazardous chemicals to the environment or even the inherent intoxication of workers [25].
A key issue studied is the implementation of green supply
chain practices [26, 27], which has also been investigated
for the textile and clothing industries [9, 28]. Such supply
chain practices also extend to the social side. While some
issues have already been mentioned in the introduction,
worker-related aspects are the most common. Respective
social standards include, for example, working hours and
conditions, access to fresh water and toilets, child labour,
or even forced labour. Problems of non-compliance regarding such requirements have been frequently
documented in textile and clothing supply chains [25, 28,
29] and have led to the creation and implementation of
related standards [30].
Overall, the risk aspect is so prominent and relevant in
¨
related research that Seuring and Muller [6] formulate one
norm strategy for sustainable supply chain management,
regarding the particular factors that drive such risk management and whether and how environmental and social
aspects are managed differently, if risk measures for sustainable supply chains management are implemented.
The key reaction of companies in this respect is the
implementation of a related risk management system. This
is often driven by a rather reactive approach based on
stakeholder demands [31, 32], which is also [17] the case
for ‘‘conventional’’ risk management. However, even
proactive companies might implement such a system as
part of their proactive approach to sustainable supply chain
management [33].
Even though it is undisputed that risk management for
environmental and social affairs along the entire supply
chain is essential for companies, there is no evidence what
factors are driving companies to do so and how such a risk
management is performed.
2.2 Development of hypotheses and items
The normative strategy ‘‘supplier management for risk and
¨
performance’’ posited by Seuring and Muller [6] serves as
a starting point for the subsequent arguments. They indicate that governments, customers, and other stakeholders
are driving focal companies with pressure and incentives to
perform supplier evaluation for risk and performance as
well as to develop sustainable products. In a Delphi study,
¨
Seuring and Muller [34] identify three key groups driving
companies towards sustainable supply chain management.
Customers drive related product development issues. Nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) constitute a key group
and serve as representatives of a wider set of stakeholders,
raising different demands than those of customers [7, 35].
Public administration acts by mandating laws or legalities,
which are increasingly enforced on an international level.
Particularly from a risk management perspective, the demands from NGOs [29] and legal regulations are perceived
as key drivers for the implementation of environmentally
and socially related risk measures, thereby companies
aiming at avoiding a loss of reputation [33]. Consequently,
this lays the foundations for the ﬁrst two hypotheses. In
theory, motivation factors could have been distinguished in
the formulation of the hypothesis in the environmental and
social contexts; yet in a somehow realistic perspective, this
is impossible in a real-world situation. In our pre-study
with 10 experts, the company managers highlighted this, so
the motivation factor is seen as applicable to both environmental and social issues.
H1 The higher the pressure from NGOs, the more companies will implement supply chain-related measures for
(a) environmental and (b) social risks (see Table 1).

Page 3 of 12 2
Table 1 Single items for assessing stakeholder pressure
Item

NGO pressure

1.

NGOs comment on environmental and social activities of our
company

2.

NGOs demand that our companies comment on environmental
and social issues

3.

Our company risks losing its reputation or incurring
competitive disadvantages if problems in compliance against
NGO demands or NGO agreements would be reported

4.

Our company takes possible (re-)actions from stakeholders
into account when making decisions on environmental and
social issues

While the ﬁrst hypothesis concentrates on NGOs, the
second one focusses on legal requirements but is quite in
line with the ﬁrst one. Different supply chain governance
structures have been discussed, driving related corporate
action [36]. Such measures are in line with a long list of
product- and process-related regulations, particularly
within the European Union, that are regularly ensured
through legal compliance audits. This is summarised in the
second hypothesis.
H2 The higher the legal demand from companies, the
more companies will implement supply chain-related
measures for (a) environmental and (b) social risks (see
Table 2).
While the ﬁrst two hypotheses address the external environment, there are also proactive drivers of respective
internal conduct [26, 37]. Every company has its own
culture, values, and targets. These are formed by owners,
management, and employees. A basic element is a written
policy [38], which encourages employees towards respective conduct. One prominent example is one of the organic
cotton chains, where such proactive action from both small
[39, 40] and multinational companies [41] has been portrayed. Such proactivity is only achieved if environmental
and social issues receive a high degree of attention and are
therefore embedded into corporate culture. The communication pattern within an organisation is another essential
indicator of management commitment [11]. The latter
implies a long-term orientation and not just a search for
easy wins and quick ﬁxes. Hence, internal orientation for
sustainability has been a further driver for such sustainability initiatives [22], leading to hypothesis 3:
Table 2 Single items for assessing legal requirements
Item

Legal requirements

1.

Products and processes of our company are inﬂuenced by legal
demand on environmental and social issues

2.

Our company regularly audits legal compliance


Corporate orientation

1.

Our company has a written policy for environmental and
social conducts

2.

Our company aims at each employee comprehending the
relevance of environmental and social conducts

3.

Environmental and social proactivities receive high priority
in our company

4.

Environmental and social actions are an active part of our
corporate culture

H3 The higher the internal orientation of (top) management towards sustainability, the more companies will
implement supply chain-related measures for (a) environmental and (b) social risks (see Table 3).
As for the respective items for testing hypotheses 3 and
4, measures of internal conduct are employed:
Yet, even proactive companies strive for competitiveness. This is a prerequisite for staying in the market in the
long term, particularly in dynamic sectors [8, 29]. Such
issues have also been discussed in sustainable supply chain
management [42]. Inter-organisational collaboration supports impacts performance of the supply chain [43] and can
therefore also be expected to contribute to risk management. Hypothesis 4 is formulated accordingly:
H4 The higher the aim of a company for competitive
differentiation based on a corporate sustainability orientation, the more likely companies will implement supply
chain-related measures for (a) environmental and (b) social
risks.
As a speciﬁc aspect for this research and its industrial
context, the risk exposure of the supply chain is taken into
account, which Wiengarten et al. [8] also address for the
clothing industry, relating back to the aforementioned
problems (also [25, 32]). As a consequence, the information ﬂows along the supply chain need to include environmental and social aspects leading to a greater effort not
only in coordination but also to related opportunism [41].
The impacts of short product life cycles have been discussed [44], which demand the supply chain strategy to
take such product-related factors into account. This provides a link back into the previously discussed aspects of
corporate proactivity and competitive differentiation.
H5 The higher the risk exposure of its supply chain, the
more likely companies will implement related measures for
(a) environmental and (b) social risks (see Table 5).
As a further step, we need to present the items used for
measuring how environmental and social risks are managed. Some items are taken up both for environmental and

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:2

social issues; so, they are introduced only once. One such
measure is that internal responsibility rests with a senior
manager and is not delegated to a lower level of the
company’s hierarchy [26]. Companies might also take action in related industry initiatives.
The starting point in both cases is found in the question
of what environmental and social aspects need to be
monitored. For the social side, standards such as the SA
8000 offer a baseline and deﬁne criteria for work safety and
conditions, health, or the right to form unions. An effect of
the implementation of standards is the coordination of efforts along the supply chain [45]. Frequently, social audits
are implemented, which can also be executed by third
parties [46]. This risk-avoiding related measure is often
combined with an active involvement in social responsible
conduct [45] and might even require intensive cooperation
with suppliers, where the already mentioned examples
from the clothing industry can be referred to again [39–41].
This argument might even be seen as one of the starting
points for the overall debate on sustainable supply chain
management. On the other hand, policies need to be in
place if misconduct is observed, both internally and also
among suppliers [33]. Respective items are summarised in
Table 6.
On the environmental side, many aspects mirror those
on the social side, such as top management support and the
active engagement in interest groups.
A key question concerns product characteristics and
therefore product development. Restricted substances
might be shortlisted as life cycle assessment-based data and
toxicity-related information would be used for determining
impacts along the supply chain [47]. In sourcing materials
and pre-products, environmental criteria have to be fulﬁlled
not only in terms of the used materials and parts but also by
the respective processes at the suppliers. This implies that
monitoring has to cover the materials as well as the suppliers. Again, third parties might be employed for
monitoring respective conduct regarding related processes.
Last but not least, suppliers not fulﬁlling the related requirements risk being delisted and removed from the supply chain. The issues discussed are summarised in the items
in Table 7.
Bringing all the arguments together allows conceptualising environmental and social risk-related drivers and
measures, as shown in Fig. 1.

3 Survey methodology
In order to test the hypotheses and the model, we conducted a survey within the European clothing and apparel
industry. First, to optimise the ﬁnal model, the construct

performed a series of semi-structured interviews with 10
clothing industry experts from the industry, consulting, and
academia. All related aspects of supply chain management,
risk management, and sustainability were addressed. The
upfront developed construct conceptualisation and operationalisation were readjusted to conform to the ﬁnal
model. Pretest data were collected, and a very ﬁrst evaluation of measurement models and the structural model
was performed. Finally, some indicators of the measurement models were adjusted based on the evaluation of the
pretest data.
For data collection, a survey at four value-added steps
within the European clothing industry was performed. The
questionnaire consisted of 34 questions (see the items listed
in Tables 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7) and applied six-point Likert
scales, where the larger value represents strong agreement
with respect to each measurement variable while the
smaller value represents strong disagreement. We used an
equal-point Likert scale to encourage respondents to give a
clear indication instead of constant average answers.
Content validity of the questionnaire was assured [48] as
the questions (indicators), their formulation, and scaling
had been intensely discussed in expert interviews. The
questionnaire was sent out to 292 persons in companies by
personalised emails. Only one person per company was
approached. All companies have activities in at least one of
the value-adding steps: (1) production of fabric, (2) production of apparel, (3) owning a brand or (4) retailing. The
overall supply chain is typically run by a brand owner,
which fulﬁls all criteria of a focal company, such as designing the product, being visible to the customer as well as

managing the supply chain. The companies approached are
located in ﬁve European countries (Germany, Poland,
Switzerland, Turkey, and the Netherlands). Each of them is
driving a global supply chain. Addresses were collected by
studying trade journals and from upfront personal approaches by telephone. We received 92 useful responses;
therefore, we had a response rate of 31.5 %. The response
rate was achieved only by sending personal emails and,
where possible, providing a reminder by phone. Respondents are mainly part of the ﬁrst and second management
levels. Thirty-ﬁve per cent of all respondents are members
of the top management; 43 % belong to the second management level. Two and a half per cent of respondents did
not give an indication of their management level, and the
remaining part (19.5 %) is respondents from lower management. The distribution of management levels of the
respondents is in line with the sample approached. The size
of companies responding represents the structure of this
sector. Twenty-six per cent achieve a yearly turnover from
€ 1 to 10 million, 22 % in the range from €10 to 50 M,
28 % from €50 to 500 M, and 22 % achieve more than
€500 M annual turnover.
For data analysis, a structural equation analysis was
performed. Covariance- and variance-based methods are
available for the estimation of the model. Covariancebased methods are the most popular for estimating structural equation models [49] but have high prerequisites
concerning theory, data, and the operationalisation of latent
variables [50, 51]. The advantage of covariance-based
methods is easy-to-handle, simple goodness-of-ﬁt measures. The variance-based partial least square (PLS)

External
demand

Risk related drivers

Risk related measures

Stakeholder
pressure

H1a

H2a

H1b

Legal requirements

Management of
environmental risk

H2b

Supply chain
characteristics

Internal drivers

H3a
Corporate
orientation

H3b
H4a

Competitive
differentiation

H4b
Management of
social risk
H5a

Risk exposure of
supply chain

H5b

Fig. 1 Model of environmental and social risk-related drivers and measures


Table 4 single items for assessing competitive differentiation

Table 7 Environmental risk measures

Item

Competitive differentiation

Item

Management of environmental risk

1.

Our company communicates its activities for environmentally
and socially sound products and conducts into the market

1.

A senior manager is responsible for managing environmental
risks

2.

Our company distinguishes itself from competitors by means
of its clear positioning towards environmentally and socially
sound products and processes

2.

Our company plays an active role in environmental interest
groups

3.

There are requirements for product development, specifying
environmental criteria of products

4.

There is a list of restricted substances as part of the product
design speciﬁcations for sourced materials, which must be
obeyed

5.

Product life cycle assessments (LCA) are an integral part of
product evaluation in our company

6.

Only environmentally certiﬁed materials are to be used

7.

During product design, material samples are tested towards
being environmentally sound, thus avoiding environmental
problems

8.

Environmental criteria play a key role in supplier selection and
evaluation

9.

Our company conducts environmental audits at suppliers or
employs third parties for such audits

10.

Our company has policies in place for taking action if
environmental misconduct (at suppliers) is documented

Table 5 Single items for assessing risk exposure of the supply chain
Item

Risk exposure of the supply chain

1.

Our company organises global supply chains

2.

A high degree of information has to be coordinated for our
business activities

3.

The uncertainty resulting from the multitude of actors and
products is a typical element of the business activities of our
company

4.

The products of our company have a short product life cycle
(short use phase)

Table 6 Social risk measures
Item

Management of social risk

1.

A senior manager is responsible for managing social risks

2.

Our company plays an active role in social interest groups/
NGOs

3.

A code of conduct or similar standard such as SA 8000 is
implemented and has to be obeyed for all business activities
Our company conducts social audits at suppliers or employs a
third party for such audits

4.
5.

Our company offers incentives for suppliers if they engage in
social responsible conduct

6.

Our company cooperates with business partners beyond the
ﬁrst tier towards improving social (working) conditions
along the supply chain

7.

Our company has policies in place for taking action if social
misconduct (at suppliers) is documented

method has advantages when sample sizes are small, the
data are non-normally distributed, or non-convergent results are likely because complex models with many variables and parameters are estimated [52]. The disadvantage
is that the PLS method does not provide a simple goodnessof-ﬁt measure. That means that, applying the PLS algorithm requires an extensive model evaluation. We used the
variance-based partial least square (PLS) method because
conceptualisation of risk management in sustainable supply
chains is so far still under research, sample size can be
smaller than in covariance-based methods, and models with
many indicators can be estimated. Therefore, the disadvantages of missing global goodness-of-ﬁt measures and

123

complex model evaluations were accepted. The evaluation of
the measurement models and the structural model was performed against criteria as suggested by [50, 53]. As a software tool, we used SmartPLS version: 2.0 M3 (beta) [54].
For performing model estimation with PLS, the minimum requirement of the sample size is 10 times the highest
number of exogenous constructs loading on endogenous
constructs [51]. The highest number of exogenous constructs used in one construct of the hypotheses was ﬁve.
Therefore, the sample size of 92 is adequate for using the
PLS method.

4 Results of model estimation
The results of the model estimation are illustrated in Fig. 2
and presented subsequently.
4.1 Evaluations of model quality
Applying the PLS algorithm requires an extensive model
evaluation. Our evaluation is oriented on the catalogue of
adequate, nonparametric quality criteria of Chin [55].
Furthermore, we followed typical suggestions [50, 51] so
that the model evaluation follows a multilevel process.
Only if latent variables are reliably estimated does the
evaluation of the structural model make sense. Therefore,
the measurement model is evaluated ﬁrst followed by the

Fig. 2 Estimated structural
model
External
demand

Risk related drivers
Stakeholder
pressure

Risk related measures
H1a: 0.51 ***
H1b: 0.27***
Management of
environmental risk

H2a: 0.12**
Legal requirements

R2=0.71
Q2=0.36

Supply chain
characteristics

Internal drivers

H2b: 0.14**

Corporate
orientation

Competitive
differentiation

H3a: 0.18**
H3b: 0.27***
H4a: 0.31***
H4b: -0.05 n.s.
Management of
social risk

R2=0.69
Q2=0.45

H5a: 0.15***
Risk exposure of
supply chain

H5b : 0.16***

4.2 Evaluation of measurement models

Table 8 Average variance extracted, composite reliability, and
Cronbach’s alpha

A measurement model speciﬁes the relationship between
observable variables and the underlying construct. All
constructs are reﬂectively operationalised. Several criteria
are discussed for the evaluation of reﬂective constructs.
According to typical suggestions [50, 51, 53], we evaluated
the reliability of the measurement models using indicator
reliability, construct reliability, convergent validity, and
discriminant validity.
Indicator reliability speciﬁes how much of an indicator’s
variance can be explained by the underlying latent variable.
It is demanded that more than 50 % of an indicator’s
variance is explained by the latent construct. Its value is the
square of the item loading [50]. That means that, for item
loadings of the latent constructs on an indicator variable,
square of the indicator loading larger than 0.7 is acceptable
[50, 51]. Other authors suggest that an indicator loading of
0.4 is acceptable [50] what equals a square of the indicator
loading of 0.64. Indicator loadings less than 0.4 should be
eliminated from measurement models [56]. In our study,
the indicator loadings ranged between 0.68 and 0.97; in
other words, the lowest indicator’s explained variance was
just below 0.5 but above 0.4. This indicator was therefore
not deleted. This implies that we ﬁnd support for indicator
reliability.
Construct reliability discovers whether a construct is
adequately measured by its indicators [50]. This requires
that indicators assigned to the same construct jointly
measure the construct adequately [57]. Therefore, composite reliability can be used to check how well a construct
is measured by its assigned indicators [51]. A good
threshold is composite reliability being larger than 0.6 [50].
All values are larger than 0.6 as required (see Table 8).

Construct

Average
variance
extracted

Composite
reliability

Cronbach’s
alpha

Stakeholders

0.78

0.93

0.90

Legal requirements

0.79

0.88

0.74

Corporate orientation

0.77

0.93

0.90

Competitive differentiation

0.93

0.96

0.93

Risk exposure of
supply chain
Management of
environmental risk

0.71

0.91

0.86

0.53

0.90

0.87

Management of social risk

0.64

0.93

0.91

Additionally, a commonly used measure for construct validity is Cronbach’s alpha. The latter quantiﬁes how well a
set of indicators measures the construct. An indicator set is
only useable if Cronbach’s alpha exceeds 0.7 [53]. Rossiter
considers very high values as problematic because this
could be a sign that content or linguistic validity of indicators is congruent. Therefore, an ideal value for Cronbach’s alpha is 0.8 [58]. Therefore, we double-checked for
linguistic congruence by the experts’ discussions. All values of Cronbach’s alpha in our model exceed 0.7 which
indicates that we are sure that the indicator set measures
the construct quite well (see Table 8).
Convergent validity assesses the correlation between
responses obtained by maximally different methods measuring the same construct [51]. It can be measured by the
average variance extracted (AVE), which measures the
variance of its indicators captured by the construct relative
to the total variance. A common threshold value of


Table 9 AVE and squared correlations
Construct

Competitive
differentiation

Stakeholders

Legal
requirements

Corporate
orientation

Management
of social risk

Risk exposure of
the supply chain

Competitive
differentiation

0.93

Stakeholders

0.47

Legal requirements

0.26

0.29

Corporate orientation

0.49

0.32

0.38

Management of social risk

0.36

0.58

0.39

0.46

0.64

Supply chain
characteristics

0.09

0.19

0.22

0.23

0.31

0.71

Management of
environmental risk

0.53

0.51

0.37

0.49

0.53

0.26

Management of
environmental
risk

0.78
0.79
0.77

0.64

All AVE values are greater than the squared correlations of the latent variables

Table 10 Path coefﬁcients and
t values

Hypothesis

Endogenous construct

Exogenous construct

Path coefﬁcient

t value

H1b

Social risk

NGOs

0.51

5.56***

H1a

Environmental risk

NGOs

0.27

3.15***

H2b

Social risk

Legal requirements

0.14

1.74**

H2a

Environmental risk

Legal requirements

0.12

1.72**

H3b

Social risk

Corporate orientation

0.27

2.26***

H3a

Environmental risk

Corporate orientation

0.18

1.73**

H4b

Social risk

Competitive differentiation

-0.05

0.42 n.s.

H4a

Environmental risk

Competitive differentiation

0.31

3.07***

H5b

Social risk

Risk exposure of the supply chain

0.16

2.83***

H5a

Environmental risk

Risk exposure of the supply chain

0.15

2.42***

**p [ 0.1; ***p [ 0.05

AVE [ 0.5 conﬁrms that at minimum, half of the variance
of indicator is explained by the underlying latent variable
[50, 51, 59].
Discriminant validity describes whether the constructs
are really independent. For testing discriminant validity,
AVE can also be used. Discriminant validity is proven if
the AVE of a latent variable is greater than the squared
correlations of this latent variable with any other of the
model’s constructs [59]. In Table 9, AVE values are illustrated in bold; the squared correlations are in the diagonal thereunder.
4.3 Evaluation of the structural equation model
The evaluation of the structural model is based on several
criteria, reﬂecting the path coefﬁcients in the structural
model and their signiﬁcance, the coefﬁcient of determination (R2), the effect size f2, and prediction relevance.
The path coefﬁcients represent standardised beta-coefﬁcients resulting from the least-squares estimation. The
power of the exogenous constructs is evaluated by the
standardised path coefﬁcients. According to Chin [55], a

123

substantial relation can be considered from values larger
¨
than 0.2. Lohmoller [60] considers relations larger than 0.1
already as relevant.
Due to missing distributional assumptions of the sample
set, a parametric test of signiﬁcance cannot be performed in
PLS. The bootstrapping method provides the possibility to
substitute the theoretical distribution function by the empirical distribution function of the sample [53]. With the
empirical distribution of estimated average on the sample
and variance, the null hypothesis can be tested with a t test,
determining that estimated path coefﬁcients are signiﬁcantly different from null [53]. The level of signiﬁcance
with t values [ 1.65 is larger than 90 % and with t values [ 1.96 is larger than 95 %. To avoid instable t values,
the bootstrapping procedure was performed with 2000
samples (see Table 10).
A substantial relation for hypotheses H1a, H1b, H3b,
and H4a can be considered with values [ 0.2. For hypotheses H2a, H2b, H3a, H5a, and H5b, a relevant relation
with values [ 0.1 could be observed. We could not observe
a relation for hypothesis H4b. The corresponding t values

Table 11 Effect sizes (f2)
Constructs

Management of
environmental
risk

Management
of social risk

NGOs

0.0596

0.2348

Legal requirements

0.0229

0.0040

Corporate orientation
Competitive differentiation

0.0092
0.0963

0.0567
0.0243

Risk exposure of the
supply chain

0.2890

0.0607

Table 12 Values of Stone–Geisser criterion (Q2)
Construct

Q2

Management of environmental risk

0.3584

Management of social risk

0.4521

R2 reﬂects the level or share of the latent constructs’
explained variance [53]. According to Chin [49], R2 values
of 0.66, 0.33, and 0.19 in PLS path models can be interpreted as substantial, moderate, and weak, respectively.
The coefﬁcients of determination (R2) in our study are 0.71
for the management of environmental risk and 0.69 for the
management of social risk (see Fig. 2), respectively. From
these results, we conclude a substantial explanatory power
of our model.
For each effect in the path model, the effect size f2 is
calculated as the increase in R2 relative to the proportion of
variance of the latent variable that remains unexplained.
According to Chin [50], f2 values of 0.02, 0.15, and 0.35
imply small, medium, and large effects, respectively.
Typically, as the f2 values are not directly displayed in
SmartPLS, they were calculated according to the suggestions [50, 53]. Table 11 shows the effect sizes (f2) between
the constructs.
The model’s predictive validity can be tested with the
Stone–Geisser test [49]. The Stone–Geisser criterion Q2
was determined with the blindfolding procedure. The
model is considered to have predictive validity if Q2 is
larger than 0 [55]. This supports that the observed values
are well reconstructed, and that the model has predictive
relevance (see Table 12).

5 Findings
The ﬁndings of the structural equation analysis can be interpreted accordingly. The main drivers for companies to
manage environmental and social risks are pressures and
incentives from stakeholders, particularly NGOs (H1a and

H1b conﬁrmed). Other than pure economic-driven risk
management, which is intended to secure companies’ ﬁnancial targets, environmental and social aspects reﬂect the
extension of relevant stakeholders in sustainable supply
chain management as summarised [6]. Hence, sustainable
operations are closely linked to stakeholder management.
In order to avoid negative reports, loss of reputation, and
therefore competitive disadvantage, companies try to present a positive image to their stakeholders. This extends to
incorporating potential stakeholder reactions into business
decisions. Legal requirements are only weak drivers for
social and environmental risk management activities (H2a
and H2b conﬁrmed with low path coefﬁcients). A substantial inﬂuence could neither be observed for the management of social risk nor for environmental risk. As
already expected after having conducted the expert interviews, the effect of legal requirements is dominated by
other drivers. Our survey results show that companies
strictly comply with legal regulation. Other drivers, such as
stakeholder pressure and internal orientation, imply higher
social and environmental standards. Legal regulation just
ensures that companies fulﬁl compliance-driven minimum
requirements. This result allows a better comprehension of
the issue, namely that overall NGOs have more impact on
companies’ actions. In the Delphi study [34], there was no
consistence evident between researchers and NGO experts’
opinion towards this question. Our study shows a considerably higher inﬂuence of stakeholders and NGO pressure
on companies.
Corporate orientation signiﬁcantly impacts the management of social risk (H3b conﬁrmed). Contrastingly,
there is only a weak effect of corporate orientation on the
management of environmental risk (H3a conﬁrmed with
low path coefﬁcient). Companies with signiﬁcant activities
in risk management for social affairs are stating the importance of social action for owners and employees in a
written management commitment. In these companies,
social action is part of corporate culture and has a high
priority in daily business. In our preparative expert interviews, one of the experts stated that if there is no corporate
orientation towards sustainability, all sustainable action is
green washing. Even though our survey is not a conﬁrmation of this argument, it shows that corporate orientation
is at least a prerequisite for integrating social measures into
supply chain management. As we could observe, there is
only a weak impact of corporate orientation on the management of environmental risk. This needs to be explained
differently, which is done below.
There is strong support for companies aiming at competitive differentiation to be engaging in the management
of environmental risk (H4a conﬁrmed). Yet, it could not be
observed that companies implement activities to manage
social risk as a means of corporate differentiation (H4b

hazardous substances in textiles than of social conditions in
the supply chain. There is an attitude behaviour gap evident
[61] as was conﬁrmed in the expert interviews. In our
survey, we could notice this gap as companies are focussing on differentiation based on environmental criteria.
They actively communicate these differences and safeguard environmental criteria in the form of intense risk
management for environmental affairs within their corporation and the whole supply chain.
Rather surprising is the fact that the global fragmentation of the clothing industry and the related perception of
being highly exposed to social and environmental risks are
only weak drivers for risk management activities (H5a and
H5b conﬁrmed with low path coefﬁcients). A high incidence rate of damaging events, which is indicated by
global trade ﬂows, complex supply chains with more information overcharging supply chain members, and short
product life cycles, does not trigger companies to manage
this social or environmental risk with high priority. One
could argue that managers responsible for supply chain
activities are not aware of the implied risks. However, it is
evident that media and NGOs are stressing the implicated
risk almost daily, and our experts stated their risk awareness as well. Nonetheless, companies see themselves in a
competitive position where a cost-efﬁcient supply chain is
the dominant prerequisite. Companies in a highly competitive industry seem to favour economic performance
over social or environmental issues, particularly if there
was a conﬂict among related performance criteria.

6 Discussion
The contribution of the paper is threefold: First, it extends
previous research on supply chain risk management. This is
dominated by listing certain risk issues [2] and risk practices [17] and assessing their performance implications
[16]. The aspect of why companies perform risk management seems surprisingly neglected. In the economically
driven case, it seems quite obvious that risk management is
implemented in order to avoid supply chain disruption,
quality issues, and similar effects, thereby staying competitive and avoiding ﬁnancial losses. In many cases,
shareholders can have similar demands to NGOs, demanding economically based risk management along the
supply chain. This would require additional empirical research, but the factors identiﬁed and their relevance would
be quite similar. The role of shareholders, who form one
particular set of stakeholders, would have to be emphasised. However, internal orientation and striving for competitiveness are well in line with previous suggestions from
conceptual research [12].

123

Logist. Res. (2015) 8:2

Second, there is the major conceptual contribution of
this paper. While risk management in sustainable supply
chains has been mentioned quite often [6], a respective
conceptualisation has been missing so far. The ﬁve constructs (stakeholder pressure, legal pressure, internal orientation, competitiveness, and risk exposure) are quite
general; however, they comprehend the major forces
driving the management of environmental and social risks
in supply chains. This is speciﬁed in the items used for
measuring the constructs, which extends, for example, the
¨
norm strategy of Seuring and Muller [6] and sheds light on
what drives related risk management measures. Further, the
particular indicators used within this study specify the
constructs of risk management. The focus on environmental and social risks seems justiﬁed as concentrating on
them allowed a shorter questionnaire.
The third contribution of the paper is based on the
empirical research. Hence, the model is not only developed
but also tested in a survey applying structural equation
modelling. There are some key points of the empirical
research that warrant discussion. While previous research
also emphasised the relevance of legal requirements, such
¨
as the Delphi study of Seuring and Muller [34], where they
are seen as being of equal relevance to stakeholder pressure, the ﬁndings from this research seem more straightforward. Legal demands rather form a kind of baseline that
has to be met regardless. In international operations and
supply chains, which are particularly relevant for the
clothing sector studied here but would also hold for many
other sectors, these legal demands are only partly relevant.
Legal requirements of one particular country or even the
European Union are only enforceable within their borders.
Contrastingly, companies perceive NGO pressure as much
more relevant [11]; this is labelled as ‘‘reconceptualising
the supply chain’’. The difference observed among environmental and social risks is somewhat surprising and has
not been suggested in previous empirical research [24].
Recent examples and news coverage provide evidence of
such pressure for both aspects, which leaves some questions open for future research, where this could be analysed
in detail.
The differences in corporate orientation and competitive
differentiation seem to be easier to comprehend. Corporate
orientation is more relevant for managing social risks.
Here, we might have some sector-speciﬁc impact as social
issues are highly relevant for the clothing industry. The
ﬁndings for competitive differentiation are well in line with
previous research. Win–win situations are found among the
environmental and economic dimensions of sustainability,
while trade-offs among the social and economic dimensions seem to be harder to overcome [6].
A last word should be spent on the managerial relevance
the insights useful as there are strong demands for the integration of sustainability criteria into supply chain management. Our results may help them to focus these
discussions and offer guidance to managing environmental
and social risks in their supply chain. While the factors
studied show some differences, the overall success would
depend on integrating all of them. In related literature, authors suggest that collaboration with stakeholders (here
NGOs) is essential for managers [62, 63]. This study provides evidence that NGOs have a high impact on companies’
actions. As a managerial implication, the result indicates
that companies have to take both the internal and the external drivers into account to establish related measures.

7 Conclusions
The paper offers an empirical study on risk management in
sustainable supply chains. This is operationalised by
assessing external, i.e. stakeholder and legal pressure, as
well as internal orientation and competitiveness drivers for
implementing measures towards managing environmental
and social risks in supply chains. The ﬁndings emphasise
the impact of stakeholder pressure on companies and their
supply chains. Yet, the survey-based research also ﬁnds
strong evidence for the self-interest and self-motivation of
companies in moving towards sustainable supply chain
management by reducing environmental and social risks.
One key suggestion for future research is to extend the
empirical study to other parts of the world, particularly
Asia, where most of the clothing industry factories are
located. This future research should (1) yield interesting
insight into managers’ perceptions in respective countries
and (2) allow comparison to this European-based study. A
second extension of the extant research would address
different industrial sectors. This should also provide more
detailed insight into the inﬂuence of risk exposure.
Finally yet importantly, one of the deliberate omissions
of this research would also be worthwhile to study, which
is the intersection or interplay of environmental and social
risks with economic risks. While the evidence found here,
addressing this intersection in a separate study seems
promising and would deepen insights into supply chain risk
management.

