Envisioning a healthier world – why this matters to the G20
In September 2015, 194 countries signed on to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
providing an ambitious, universal and transformational vision. ‘Ensuring healthy lives and
promoting the well-being for all at all ages’ (SDG 3) is essential to overall sustainable
development, made all the more relevant by the continued emergence of new global health
challenges and pandemics like Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR). Despite progress on
surveillance and health care innovation, there are still devastating gaps in health outcomes
between and within countries. Life expectancy varies drastically between rich and poor,
healthcare is not universally accessible, and too many lives are cut short by preventable
infectious and chronic diseases. Ensuring ‘Health for All’ remains a persistent and entrenched
global challenge. As countries organize their national and local policies, SDGs provide a vision
for public policy that can lead to positive change based on evidence and political commitment.
The Hangzhou G20 Leaders’ Communiqué in 2016 mentioned health as an “issue affecting the
world economy” and confirmed its contribution to sustainable development but otherwise
restricted itself thematically to “explore in an inclusive manner to fight antimicrobial
resistance”. Only under the Germany G20 Presidency health received the attention and political
leadership it deserves: For the first time, a G20 Health Ministers Meeting was held and the
Berlin Declaration[1] adopted, acknowledging the importance of health as well as the scale of
the challenge ahead. In particular, the G20 now emphasizes on contributing towards universal
health coverage (UHC). The anticipation is that Argentina will continue to address health in its
G20 Presidency, but to what extent can all the G20 governments align their national goals and
development investment with the SDGs by elevating the priority accorded to health, and by
acknowledging the centrality of health to achieving the SDGs? Encouragingly, the desire
appears to be there, and in fact the G20 Action Plan lists Global Health as one of the fifteen
Sustainable Development Sectors (SDS) [2]. Understanding that the G20 will prioritize sectors
of Agenda 2030 where it has comparative advantage and adds value as a global economic
forum, it seems important that investment in health reduces poverty, contributes to economic
growth, strengthens labor productivity, builds more equitable societies, addresses the need for
gender equality, and most importantly, contributes to human development. Consequently, as the
G20 Action Plan is updated and adapted to reflect successive G20 priorities until 2030, the
Global Health SDS should achieve ever-increasing prominence on the G20 agenda.
In this paper we respond to the above needs, and describe a two-year process whereby regional
consultations (Figure 1) have facilitated an evidence-based exchange amongst researchers and
practitioners for whom a healthier world is a key dimension of sustainable development. We
outline the process by which these consultations originated and were organised, and summarise
the key findings that emerged during the dialogues. Based on these insights, the paper
articulates a case and a vision for G20 political leadership in which concerted attention is given
to catalyzing progress towards the SDGs by recognizing the centrality of health.

The consultations and dialogue – an inclusive, participatory process
In November 2015, 60 global health policy research institutions, researchers and international
agencies came together in Geneva to explore what it takes to accelerate the implementation of
the health-related SDGs. The participants of the meeting left convinced that the 2030 agenda is
only possible with different stakeholders acknowledging the links between the 17 Goals and
targets, and working together towards achieving the Goals[3]. After this first meeting, several
regional and global events unfolded in 2016 and 2017. These meetings explored the role of
policy research institutions, evidence informed policies and meaningful engagement of civil
society and citizens in implementation and monitoring of these goals, specifically those that
relate to and impact on health. Underlying these consultations was the belief that actions taken
by different stakeholders such as academic and policy research institutions are pivotal for the
success of implementing the SDGs and achieving the health-related goals by 2030 at national
level.
Each consultation brought together at least 50 representatives from ministries of health, civil
society organizations, and academic and policy research institutions to identify the needs and
challenges of health-related SDG implementation, and provided a space to generate ideas for
collective action within countries, regionally and globally. The consultations reinforced the idea
that actions must be guided by an intersectoral approach, and it is critical to engage civil society
and citizens to generate evidence and to solve health challenges. The regional and global
meetings have challenged development donors, researchers and policymakers to shift thinking
from global tools to contextualized solutions and targets, and from data collection to coconstruction and sharing of knowledge to bring change[4].

Findings from the consultations relevant to the G20 for global health
investment
The following findings emerged from the consultations and fora outlined above, as well as some
practical suggestions for action.

1. Integrate health in all policies
Health-in-All-Policies is an approach to improve accountability for health impacts at all levels
of policy-making[5,6]. It emphasises the consequences of public policies on health systems, and
recognizes the influence of social determinants of health on well-being. Given the SDGs’
multisectoral nature, Goals are interrelated[7] and each Goal has a relationship to health and
wellbeing. Hence, there is an urgent need to consider the impact on health when other Goals are
being implemented.
The Shanghai Declaration on Promoting Health in the 2030 Agenda reinforces that good
governance at all levels is crucial for better health[8]. This requires investment and action at
national, local and global level. Concrete action is needed to address, among others, the
damaging effects of unsustainable production and consumption (SDG 12), to give consideration
to offset economic policies that create unemployment and unsafe working conditions (SDG 8),
to address marketing, investment and trade when it concerns health (SDGs 16 and 17).
Findings from the consultations indicate that this could be achieved through:
Recognising the economic case for health investments, in order to avoid the ongoing challenge
of premature mortality and to make significant progress towards achieving sound health for all
citizens. Health is central for individuals and households, for national growth and development
and it fundamentally contributes to employability and productivity [9].
Acknowledging health as a fundamental human right because building on the economic case
alone is insufficient to achieve health for all. The overall goal of leaving no one behind is
particularly important for health. It relates not only to SDG 1 on poverty, and SDG 10 on
inequalities but to broader exclusion as indicated through, SDG 11, and is closely linked to
gender inequalities as indicated in SDG 5. Although extreme poverty has been reduced globally,
the inequalities within and between countries have grown and need to be addressed from a
human right perspective, along with an economic one. Development researchers, donors and
partnerships can play an important role in addressing this challenge [10,11].
Introducing measures to address determinants of health such as education and early child
development, as seen already in a number of countries[12]. There is practically no health issue
that does not need joint action with other sectors. For example, the agriculture and animal sector
need to work jointly to address anti-microbial resistance (AMR). The role of the security sectors
is critical in avoiding major disease outbreaks and onward transmission. Non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) can only be addressed through action on food systems, private sector, city
planning, and health literacy. Child health can be significantly improved if efforts coupled with
stakeholders working towards SDG 1 (no poverty), 2 (zero hunger), 4 (quality education), 5
(gender equality), 8 (decent work and economic growth) and 17 (partnerships for the goals) [7].
Furthermore, there are also co-benefits of investing in environmental measures and urbanization
to improve people’s health.
Making health a discussion in policy arenas and ensuring the cooperation between different
ministries of government and policy research institutions[5]. Examples and inspiration from the
governments that have already adopted governance processes, new bills and legislation, which
include health-impact-assessment [13] should be consulted as part of the adoption of new
policies. There are examples of mayors as instigators of health in all policies to address wellbeing and quality of life in their cities; they are becoming an important global voice towards
collective action for health [13].

2. Prioritize the most vulnerable
In several contexts burden of disease, disability and premature mortality is concentrated among
the most vulnerable [14]. Cooperation and partnerships on improving the health of the most
vulnerable, especially the ethnic minorities, refugees, women and people living in rural areas,
has the potential to enhance the legitimacy of international institutions and fora like the G20.
Findings suggest that the health of the most vulnerable is prioritized rather than aiming for the
“lowest hanging fruit” as a way of demonstrating more rapid success in meeting targets, within
the G20 national contexts and in low and middle-income countries (LMICs) where health
programming is funded by the G20 countries.
This could be achieved through:
Identifying the most vulnerable populations based on the criteria of health (access and
outcomes) as well as wealth (health as human capital). Nations can then show leadership and
develop health strategies for these populations. All the dimensions of marginality (availability,
accessibility and affordability) should be taken into consideration while designing appropriate
policies [15,16].
Adopting and implementing Universal Health Care (UHC) domestically and supporting it in
LMICs in the most comprehensive form possible. Exclusions of coverage should be exceptions
rather than the norm. UHC is based on the principles of justice and equity and addresses both
the social determinants and the social implications of health by acting on the broader socioeconomic inequities that leave people behind [17]. UHC is a critical tool to enhance the
legitimacy of national governments and reduce the threat of fragility by providing citizens with
the health care they need to fully participate in all aspects of life. Evidence based policymaking
and strong partnerships (government, research community and civil society) will be needed to
ensure that coverage is equitable, and that inequities are avoided in health outcomes. It is
equally important that the performance of UHC is continuously measured [15].
Accepting responsibility for the quality of care that the most vulnerable face and acting on the
responsibility through the processes within the health systems, and promoting governance for
their health, including accountability and transparency. Good health among the most vulnerable
can be achieved with governments and other health actors taking a responsible, accountable and
transparent approach at various levels of health system governance [18].
3. Engage citizens and communities to generate evidence and find solutions
The SDG mantra of “leaving no one behind” applies resoundingly to the pervasive health
inequities that challenge all countries, including the G20 nations. The SDG framework provides
a platform for G20 countries to take the lead on a reconfiguration of public policy processes that
engage citizens and empower communities inclusively through a whole-of-society approach.
Without such a transformative measure the SDGs will not be attained. The 1978 Alma Ata
Declaration emphasized the mainstreaming of health equity on the international political agenda
and its focus on primary health care and people centered care: “People have a right and duty to
participate individually and collectively in the planning and implementation of their health care”
[19]. Since then, the concept of primary health care has become a core concept of the World
Health Organization’s (WHO) goal of health for all [19].

Engaging communities in decision-making, planning, and implementing programs and policies
that are about their own health and well-being leads to citizen empowerment and positive
sustainable change [20-23]. However, this engagement needs to go beyond broad participation
of citizen groups, as the inclusion of women and the most vulnerable groups in these processes
as key stakeholders and agents of change is crucial in addressing health inequities. Citizen
knowledge, for example on perceptions of quality of local health care services beyond the
provision of data on access to services [24], is essential if we are to not only focus on achieving
health outcomes, but also to understand the mechanisms by which these are achieved. Regular
dialogue and relationship building between health system actors and service users are central to
addressing tensions, changing mindsets and fostering respectful and culturally appropriate
health care practices [22].
This could be achieved through:
Encouraging citizen-led ownership of strategies and processes to achieve positive health
outcomes. Although citizens in many national contexts are frustrated about the barriers
preventing their engagement in the policy- and decision-making processes that affect their daily
lives, when spaces are created and the ownership is shifted towards citizens and communities
they can mobilise to bring about transformative change. One such example have been the recent
efforts to mobilise communities around prevention of spread of Dengue fever in Nicaragua and
Mexico [25].
Adding processes and mechanisms to facilitate citizen engagement in data collection,
monitoring and feedback mechanisms in order to increase public accountability in solving
complex health challenges. There is growing evidence [22] for the value of gathering user
evidence of the problems community members experience regarding health care and services.
There is increased availability of tested digital technology for G20 countries to implement such
feedback mechanisms from their citizens and in the low-middle income countries they invest in.
Working closely with conveners, such as civil society organizations, think tanks or policy
research institutions who work with citizens and communities. Such institutions not only bring
evidence, data and analysis to bear on health policy issues, but also convene policy dialogues,
roundtables, and consultations and provide spaces and platforms where different societal actors, including government representatives, private sector, and communities, can engage in an
informed and inclusive way.
Remaining aware at all stages of the role of citizens in solving health challenges and remaining
open to supporting enabling factors mentioned above. Prioritizing and systematically
integrating citizens’ inputs into decision making and policy processes can lead to sound health
policies and to their effective and accountable implementation.

4. Fill the health data gaps
The Global Partnership on Sustainable Development Data (2017) states: “Whether for reasons
of convenience, cost, or corruption, important decisions about how money and resources are
allocated to services helping the poorest people in the world’s least developed countries are too
often made based on data that is incomplete, inaccessible, or simply inaccurate — from health
to gender equality, human rights to economics, and education to agriculture” [26]. Access to
quality data will make an enormous contribution to progress towards the achievement of the
SDGs. However, many countries encounter persistent problems related to health data
availability, quality and reliability.
In order to enhance health care coverage, for example, there needs to be an understanding of
existing gaps, in particular reliable data on access to medication and health care services, and
who is being impoverished because of health care costs. Across and within countries, lack of
data comparability remains a challenge to monitoring global progress against the health-related
SDG indicators. Better data and statistics will help governments track progress, ensure that
decisions are evidence-based and strengthen accountability. A major limitation in this
endeavour, however, is the insufficient disaggregation of data at national and sub-national
levels. G20 countries will need to find ways to maximize their technical and financial assistance
for the collection of internationally comparable data within their own borders as well as in datadeprived parts of the world.
Insights and findings from the consultations indicate that health data gaps could be reduced
through:
Investing in well-functioning civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) systems domestically
and via development investments in LMICs. This will provide policy makers with reliable, upto-date data in real time and at the lowest administrative level of the population. Without a
CRVS system registering, at a minimum, all births, deaths, and causes-of-death, policy makers
are relying on surveys, censuses and other sources of incomplete data. Health information
systems in such settings may fail to capture the entire population, especially the most vulnerable
members of society.
Adopting an intersectoral approach to data collection, and putting in place mechanisms to
collect data across various actors such as governments, private sector, researchers, policy
research institutions and civil society. If citizens and communities are engaged in data
collection, contextualized data will be gathered more effectively and will help fill in local data
gaps. Liaising with diverse stakeholders will benefit from their comparative advantage in addressing the health data gap, including with the private sector to ensure that health data
collected by business and private companies is more widely available for public policy making
processes and that accountability and transparency is increased.
Adopting open access policy to share existing data to address the gaps and to maximize
utilization in research and policy-making.
Strengthening the institutions responsible for data collection by understanding their needs and
building their capacity to gather, store and analyze data. Institutions should also be
strengthened to collect reliable data and ensure quality.
Prioritizing data disaggregation to gather information and monitor progress on vulnerable and
marginalised populations.

Conclusions
The consultation findings shared in the paper confirm the approach
Further questions to be
suggested through the SDG framework. It calls for health-related
explored:
policy-making that is grounded in robust evidence and analysis, that
connects citizens with decision makers, that bridges local with
global, and that generates creative yet locally grounded solutions to
What brings intersectoral
persistent health problems. It also calls on political leaders and
collaboration and what are
policy makers to clearly recognize the role that a health-for-all
the mechanisms to sustain it?
approach can play in building nations that are more inclusive, less
divided, and less polarized. Inclusive growth and health for all,
including health for the most vulnerable, at the core of the agenda,
How to ensure quality of care
is key to ensuring legitimacy of governments and other actors
is sustained in resourcepromoting health. The paper highlights the important roles of
deprived settings?
different stakeholders in global health in promoting evidence-based
policymaking and demonstrates that meaningful partnerships and
common vision is a necessity of today. Further analysis will certainly be required to better
triangulate these findings within specific contexts. It will also be important to design and test
potential ways forward for G20 countries to address these issues, and to ensure that those
findings and lessons are shared as widely as possible.