
1 Introduction
Horizontal cooperation is a prevalent strategy for logistics
service providers (LSPs) to deal with the extensive challenges of today’s supply chain environment (e.g., complex
and global supply chains, increased competition, rising
requirements by customers) [1, 2]. Examples are multicompany networks for less-than-truck-load transportation.
Today, more than half of all small, medium, and large
LSPs are engaged in at least one such horizontal alliance
with one or multiple other LSPs [3]. This allows them to
strengthen their competitive position through improved
service scope and quality, increased productivity, and
access to new markets [1, 3, 4].
Horizontal LSP alliances are complex in nature [5] and
entail various strategically relevant decisions on which
opinions will widely differ. Examples include the question
how to develop the scope of activities or in which way to
support common activities with IT systems (e.g., whether
to offer joint mobile apps at the customer interfaces). In
addition, the alliances are inﬂuenced by the ambiguity of
cooperation and competition often referred to as coopetition [6, 7], where members are simultaneously partners and
potential competitors in the marketplace. Overall, this
provides fertile ground for conﬂicts to emerge with the
tendency to reduce performance [8].
In this respect, prior research has focused on differing
conﬂict types and their outcomes (e.g., [9]), and on postmanifestation topics such as conﬂict management and
resolution strategies (e.g., [10, 11]. It is clear that conﬂicts

incompatible goals, resource allocation disagreements,
opportunistic behavior, knowledge imitation, and competition in downstream markets’’ [12, p. 291]), at different
hierarchical levels and in different areas of the cooperation
[13]. To complement this, our research views the areas of
activities as possible source of and/or possible remedy to
conﬂict, a domain that has been neglected in prior research.
We concentrate on performance measurement (PM) as one
key area of any organization and as such also of a horizontal alliance [14], and will show that the way PM is
conducted strongly inﬂuences the level of conﬂict in a
horizontal alliance.
While the ﬁrst impulse may be to regard PM as a subordinate, operational activity within a horizontal alliance,
PM also has a truly strategic nature in communicating and
implementing strategies [15]. Consequently, Melnyk et al.
[15] argue that PM needs to be co-created simultaneously
with the strategy. Besides the operational measurement,
PM not only entails the deﬁnition of metrics and targets for
the cooperation [15, 16], but also establishing—and over
time adapting [15]—what performance is (i.e., the objectives of the alliance) and how these objectives are going to
be reached (i.e., the underlying performance drivers). All
of these are ﬁelds where the potentially different goals and
objectives, but also the different management approaches
of the alliance members meet and clash [17]. As such, PM
is an area prone to conﬂict, both relating to the question
what to measure (e.g., speed vs. punctuality of delivery)
and how to measure [18].
When such differences in opinion or interest meet in
PM, they also become apparent and can potentially be
eased, which, in turn, substantially lowers overall potential
for tension and conﬂict within the alliance. In this respect,
we build on the collaborative processes of joint action and
information sharing, which, in general, have been identiﬁed
as methods for effectively preventing the manifestation of
conﬂicts [19, 20]. We show that in the context of horizontal
LSP alliances collaborative activities in PM can effectively
offset the conﬂict potentials inherent to the alliance.
At the same time, extant literature emphasizes that the
emergence and resolution of conﬂicts also relate to the
speciﬁc context in which the conﬂicts develop [21, 22].
Here, the power structure has been identiﬁed to inﬂuence
actions and perceptions in cooperating [23] and to be
decisive in inﬂuencing whether conﬂict potential manifests
itself into actual conﬂict [24].
This research extends prior research by outlining how
the choice of the speciﬁc collaborative approach in PM
needs to account for the alliance context it is going to be
applied in. In order to do so, we draw upon resource
dependency theory (RDT) [25] and social contract theory
(SCT) [26]. Based on SCT, we conclude that collaborative

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:7

processes in PM will shape the expectations of the alliance
members and, through this, will—according to SCT—
create implicit social contracts [27]. Depending on the
alliance context—we follow Dant and Schul [28] in distinguishing symmetrical and asymmetrical power relations—these mechanisms have the potential to create
tension by running counter to the pursuit of autonomy that
companies exhibit according to RDT.
Overall, this research addresses two research questions:
(RQ 1) ‘‘How effective are joint action in PM and information sharing in PM as collaborative processes in
reducing conﬂict in horizontal LSP alliances?’’ and (RQ 2)
‘‘To what extent does the effectiveness of these two collaborative processes in PM depend on the power structure
inherent to the alliance?’’ Besides developing a conceptual
model based on RDT and SCT, the contribution of this
research lies in testing the corresponding hypotheses using
structural equation modeling based on survey data from
193 logistics service providers (LSPs) engaged in a horizontal alliance.

2 Conceptual framework
2.1 Conﬂict types and their outcomes
According to the established understanding, conﬂicts are
viewed in this research as ‘‘the experience between or
among parties that their goals or interest are incompatible
or in opposition’’ [19, p. 1224]. Inter-organizational relationships, where parties with different corporate cultures,
different regions, different mindsets, and different ways of
doing things interact intensively, provide fertile ground for
such conﬂicts [18, 29]—a situation typical for horizontal
LSP alliances [3]. Further factors that create tension and
almost inevitably lead to conﬂicts are mutual dependencies
that require continuous interactions [30], different viewpoints concerning temporal aspects (i.e., short-term vs.
long-term) [31], diverging goals, and, in the speciﬁc case of
horizontal cooperation, competitive tension [31, 32] among
members.
Viewing conﬂict from one perspective only ‘‘can
obscure important differences among different types of
[…] conﬂict’’ [10, p. 213]. We agree and focus on the two
most prominent established dimensions of conﬂict, cognitive and affective conﬂicts [33], as dependent variables in
our research as these have been found to have differing
implications [33, 34].1
1
Going back to [35], the literature sometimes views process conﬂict
as an additional third type of conﬂict. Here, some authors argue that
process conﬂict is not sufﬁciently distinct as it entails both taskrelated elements and person-related aspects. Further, Jehn et al. [36]
[35], refers to disagreements between alliance members
around task-related issues [19, 37] that revolve around the
question of ‘‘how best to accomplish an organization’s
objectives’’ [33, p. 127]. Affective conﬂict, alternatively
termed relationship conﬂict by [35], in contrast, focuses on
personal elements and, therefore, tends to be more emotional in nature [38].
Conﬂict can both be functional and dysfunctional [39],
and while research agrees about the dysfunctional nature of
affective conﬂict (e.g., [9]), research on cognitive conﬂict
has produced differing results. While most researchers
suggest that cognitive conﬂict is generally harmful to
cooperation (e.g., [34, 40]), some view the effect as contingent to the routineness of the task [10, 41]. Here, the
argumentation is that in complex tasks such as innovation
and strategic decision-making that require out-of-the-box
thinking, cognitive conﬂict is positive as disagreements and
the associated friction create new ideas and trigger
improvement of the task [10, 21, 41]. In contrast, in routine
tasks that are characterized by a low level of variability and
high repetitiveness [42], dissent is counterproductive as its
management is time consuming and frustrating [41]. This is
consistent with the empirical ﬁndings for horizontal LSP
alliances, where [43] show that conﬂict only can be positive in the non-routine ﬁeld of innovation generation,
provided that functionality of conﬂict is high, and otherwise is negative. Knowing that conﬂicts heavily inﬂuence
key outcomes of horizontal cooperation, it is important to
understand the formation of conﬂicts and how they can be
counteracted before they manifest themselves and show
their negative sides.
2.2 Power structure in horizontal alliances
The literature has shown that the way in which conﬂict
emerges and manifests itself depends on the business
context of the cooperation [21, 22] as this context determines how ‘‘a ﬁrm’s practices, procedures and processes
are shaped and constrained’’ [44]. One central contextual
variable that affects conﬂict is the power structure speciﬁc
to the relationship [21, 24, 28].
Within RDT, power is viewed as the complement to
dependency following the rationale that a party A has
power over a party B to the degree that B depends on A
[45]. Correspondingly, the literature distinguishes symmetrical power relations and asymmetrical power relations
[28].
Also from a SCT perspective symmetrical power relations and asymmetrical power relations differ substantially.
SCT provides a legitimacy perspective where legitimization of activities within a relationship is provided or denied
via social contracts [26, 46]. These contracts are ‘‘norms,

Page 3 of 15 7

assumptions, and beliefs that [alliance members] conceive
as fair and appropriate [i.e., legitimate] for parties involved
in [alliance] relationships’’ [47, p. 67] and are embedded in
any inter-ﬁrm relationship. Whenever any activities in the
alliance run counter to the social contracts, this will create
tension and evoke reactance by alliance members [26].
In a symmetrical power relation, the individual company
depends on the cooperation to the same degree to which the
cooperation depends on this individual company and its
contributions [48]. In such a balanced power situation, the
alliance members meet as equals [49, 50] and the degree of
mutuality can be expected to be high as the members need
each other to reach their individual as well as their joint
goals [12]. With respect to RDT, this is a situation where
every LSP gives up some autonomy, or as [51] put it, its
‘‘freedom to make its own decisions […] without […]
regard to the demands or expectations of […] partners,’’ in
order to secure resources necessary for its own success via
alliance membership.
An asymmetrical power relation, in contrast, signiﬁes
imbalance regarding the individual company dependence
on the cooperation. From the RDT perspective, it implies
that some LSPs (the ones with high dependence) gave up
much autonomy by entering the alliance, while other (the
ones with low dependence) gave up less autonomy. This
asymmetrical setup enables some parties to exert power
over the other members [32, 50], and a more hierarchical
and authoritarian behavior can be expected, reﬂected in
aspects like unilateral decision-making [52].
2.3 Performance measurement as a ﬁeld of conﬂict
One key area in an alliance, in which conﬂicts may arise
due to its importance [12], is performance measurement
(PM) [14]. While PM involves many operational aspects
and may be disregarded from a strategical perspective,
because it is thought to merely measure how the performance was, its true nature is fundamentally more far
reaching.
First, in the process of PM, it is necessary to establish
what performance is (i.e., the objectives of the alliance)
and how these objectives are going to be reached (i.e., the
underlying performance drivers). Here, potentially different goals and objectives of individual LSPs, but also different management approaches will meet and clash [17].
Second, PM needs to be changed over time as the internal
context of cooperation changes (e.g., member companies
entering or leaving the alliance), but also the external
context of cooperation changes. Third, PM has a coordinating function across different functional units and helps
to deal with complex and multiple institutional performance logics [53], which are likely to exist, by reducing
the tension within and across the performance logics [53].

guide and control an organization [54, 55], in our case, a
horizontal LSP cooperation, by prioritizing and by setting
deﬁnite targets. This is not only reﬂected in the old saying
‘‘what gets measured gets done,’’ but also in the corresponding research results, which emphasize that what
actually is measured shapes what managers focus on and
how they try to improve performance [15].
PM in an alliance has various attributes that makes it a
likely source of conﬂicts. On a formal level, the questions
about the what and how (i.e., what will be measured how)
are origins of possible disagreements [18]. With respect to
the what, disputes can arise when members discuss what
the decisive aspects of the cooperation are (i.e., goals,
objectives, and ambitions) and how they should be prioritized [56]. Subsequently, coordination is needed on target
values for the corresponding performance indicators [17].
Yet, the multitude of opinions in a horizontal alliance may
impede a consistent approach to PM resulting in the use of
individual key performance indicators (KPIs) by the individual ﬁrms [57]. That, in turn, sows the seed for conﬂict as
even using the same terminology for KPIs does not ensure
that the alliance members actually measure and report the
same things since the exact procedures to come up with
values for the indicators may still vary [16, 58]. This
potentially leads to situations in which members think that
they are discussing the same things, but in reality talk about
different things, not realizing that slight or even big differences between their understandings are present [17, 59].
A good example for this is service level, where even a
seemingly straightforward indicator like OTIF (on-time-infull) may be measured differently by each involved LSP,
for example, by measuring time of arrival in different
manners: One may measure arrival when the truck reaches
the site of the consignee, while another may measure it
when the truck docks to the unloading dock at the consignee, while a third may only measure once the goods are
unloaded and scanned.
Concerning the how to measure, members need to ﬁnd a
compatible way of actually conducting PM. Here, without
a coordinated approach to measurement each company
may pursue individual PM processes [59, 60]. However,
splitting up actually interdependent processes creates
interface problems that can lead to conﬂicts [21] as
addressed by the decoupling principle of [61], which states
that interdependent activities should be carried out ‘‘under
the same authority’’ (p. 70). One reason is that already
small deviations in measurement processes can lead to a
differing basis of results which potentially triggers conﬂict
as in subsequent steps the alliance members discuss performance results that are actually not comparable.

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:7

Both aspects mentioned (the what and the how) easily
lead to dissent among the alliance members, as ultimately,
PM reﬂects the operation model, and thus, the priorities
and goals as well as the processes of the horizontal alliance
[57]. PM has a central role in steering the cooperation and
in understanding its context [60]. Consequently, it is focal
to all members and a ﬁeld of conﬂict where differing
opinions and interests clash.
2.4 Collaborative processes in PM for conﬂict
prevention and reduction
Prior conﬂict literature has mainly focused on post-manifestation issues of conﬂict, covering topics such as which
conﬂict management techniques exist and how conﬂicts
can be resolved or minimized (e.g., [10, 62]). Yet, this
neglects that alliance members can also act much earlier.
Once conﬂict is present, it is rather difﬁcult to control [63]
and requires considerable effort to manage and resolve [10,
43, 62]. Therefore, attention should also be put on actively
countering conﬂict already before and during its emergence
by promoting preventive instead of only reactive means
[11, 40].
Conﬂict stems from tension, manifests itself because of
‘‘the failure of alliance partners to coordinate’’ [37, p. 157],
and is triggered when interaction takes place [19]. Therefore,
efforts to limit the emergence of conﬂict via preventive
measures need to focus on points of interaction. Here, from
the general conﬂict avoidance perspective two collaborative
processes have shown to offer substantial potential [19, 20]:
joint action and information sharing. Joint action in PM is an
extensive form of collaboration and refers to alliance
members actively coordinating their PM activities [64]. It is
consistent with Kozlowski and Bell’s [65] call for more
collaborative mechanisms in preventing conﬂict, compared
to merely exchanging information. Information sharing with
respect to PM as a less intense form of collaboration [20]
refers to sharing important information regarding the process
as well as the results of PM (i.e., values attained for the
performance indicators).
The pre-existing notion in the literature is that how
conﬂict emerges and manifests itself depends on the business context of the cooperation and that collaborative
processes in PM are effective in reducing conﬂict. Based
on this general understanding, we develop a speciﬁc theoretical model that outlines that this effect is contingent on
the (a)symmetry of power within the cooperation, and that
joint action is an effective approach in symmetrical power
relations, while information sharing is effective in asymmetrical power relations. The corresponding conceptual

Fig. 1 Conceptual model

2.5 Context-dependent effectiveness of joint action
in PM
Joint action can be understood as interpenetration of
organizational boundaries by carrying out important
activities (as in this case PM) in a cooperative or coordinated way and is a key element of relational governance
[51]. It aims at involving all alliance members in the PM
and for them to share their needs, concerns, and expectations [66] so that they effectively become ‘‘business partners’’ [51, 67]. The approach promotes an atmosphere of
forbearance, mutual respect, and balanced reciprocity, and
reduces ex-post transaction costs [5]. Joint action in PM
reﬂects the argument of [22] that elements which ‘‘increase
the strength of the ties between groups’’ (p. 522) help to
prevent conﬂicts.
2.5.1 Symmetrical power alliances
In symmetrical power alliances, members are reciprocally
dependent and must give and take to achieve individual and
mutual beneﬁt. From the RDT perspective, this implies that
all of them have given up comparable levels of autonomy.
Consequently, increasing the strength of ties via joint
action and extending the coordination within the alliance
does not impose additional constraints to them.
Following SCT, these alliances are shaped by expectations that are reﬂected in ‘‘norms based in informal social
contracts,’’ which ‘‘essentially frame their relationship’’
[26, p. 29]. One such key expectation in symmetrical power
alliances is that members have equal say in terms of

decisions made and processes conducted. The involvement
in PM processes creates a platform to pursue this claim as it
provides the opportunity to express possible concerns that
can be resolved while collaborating with other members.
Therefore, joint action in PM is well suited for symmetrical
power alliances and reduces conﬂict in three ways:
First, being reciprocally dependent, the members are
required to contribute to the success of the cooperation, but
are also more willing to do so, implying that they will open
up and establishing a mutual understanding about individual member’s motives, opinions, and know-how [20,
21]. By this, misunderstandings and ‘‘mutual feelings of
frustration’’ [68, p. 65] are avoided already early on. The
members are enabled to put other members’ behavior and
actions into context and effectively transmit their own
actions [69]. This creates the conditions to clear up possible task-related contradictions [20, 21].
Second, joint action leads to relational norms and
mutual trust among members [70]. These act as a safeguard
against partner misbehavior, improve coordination and
reduce exchange hazards [71]. Here, exchanges in an alliance are embedded within a system of relational norms and
social interactions which create mutual conﬁdence that no
party will exploit others’ vulnerabilities even if there is
such opportunity [72]. Further, member involvement and
the corresponding collaboration increase commitment and
ownership. As the companies feel that their voice and
contribution to directly address points of concern at a rather
early stage is valued, their motivation is increased, helping
minimize the risk that dissent manifests into conﬂicts [22,
69].

relations [22, 73] that leads to a benevolent atmosphere and
helps establishing pride for being a member of the alliance
[74, 75]. Strong interpersonal ties and pride in the alliance
will facilitate internal cohesion (i.e., an esprit de corps), a
sense of belonging together, and maintaining their belief
into the alliance even when exposed to internal or external
challenges. Especially in settings of coopetition, this
reduces the risk that the different members will be
aggressive toward each other [76], which in turn, reduces
potentials for affective conﬂicts.
2.5.2 Asymmetrical power alliances
In general, according to RDT, companies should choose
the least constraining device to govern relations with their
exchange partners that will secure resource access and
maximize autonomy [45]. Here, asymmetrical power alliances assemble a heterogeneous set of LSPs in the sense
that LSPs with a stronger dependence on the alliance,
which have given up more autonomy, are combined with
others with a weaker dependence that have given up less
autonomy to secure their desired resources via the alliance.
For the LSPs with more autonomy (and more power), joint
action in PM, which implies stronger ties and more coordination, would result in added constraints and reduce both
their autonomy and their power advantage over the other
members. This would run counter to them striving to keep
both their power advantage and their autonomy [25], and
creates tension.
As they do not have the same reliance on the alliance,
they are more likely to pursue their own agenda [48] and
will not be interested in incorporating processes that allow
weaker parties detailed insights into the stronger parties’
management [48, 49]. Further, they tend to consider
themselves to be in power, try ‘‘calling the shots’’ and in
that sense dominate processes in the cooperation [50]—
also PM processes. Applying joint action in PM in this
setting would create tension from the RDT perspective
between their striving for autonomy and how their autonomy would tend to be restraint by the joint action.
Applying joint action in PM in this setting would also
create severe tension from the SCT perspective between
the actual power situation and the expectations that would
be created for the less powerful members via joint action.
As outlined before, joint action entails close collaboration
and mutuality, and promotes an atmosphere of forbearance,
mutual respect, and balanced reciprocity. Further, it
implies interacting on equal footing, where all members
contribute to and inﬂuence the outcome to similar degrees.
As a consequence, joint action in PM would create a social
contract of mutual inﬂuence that is in contradiction to how
the parties view and approach the alliance. Hence, strong

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:7

collaboration via joint action in a context in which, due to
the imbalanced distribution of power, the alliance members
are not acting fully on par is not effective and creates
tension. Instead, this is likely to be a source of conﬂict in
itself.
Overall, aggregating the negative effects of joint action
in PM in an asymmetrical setting and its positive effects in
a symmetrical setting, it can be concluded that joint action
in PM is effective in reducing conﬂict in symmetrical
power settings and that it will be less effective the more
asymmetrical the alliance is. This will be the case for both
affective and cognitive conﬂicts because joint action
addresses both levels of these conﬂicts: the task-related
level of cognitive conﬂict as well as the personal level of
affective conﬂict. Thus, we hypothesize:
H1a,b Joint action in PM is more effective in reducing a)
affective and b) cognitive conﬂict in horizontal alliances
with symmetrical power relation than in ones with asymmetrical power relation.
2.6 Context-dependent effectiveness of information
sharing in PM
Information sharing with respect to PM refers to sharing
important information regarding the process as well as the
results of PM (i.e., values attained for the performance
indicators). Such information sharing has been found to be
vital [19, 20] as it facilitates transparency with regard to
performance. Through ‘‘communication […] task details,
task progress, and reasoning for task decisions’’ [20,
p. 384] are clariﬁed. The alliance members are better able
to understand other members’ way of thinking, minimizing
animosities and misinterpretations that could lead to both
affective and cognitive conﬂicts. This helps reducing the
level of uncertainty [77] and creating a common understanding [59], which improves coordination [78] and
reduces the level of conﬂict [20]. Additionally, problems
can proactively be prevented as more thorough decisions
can be made [79]. This reduces the risk of errors, which, in
turn, is associated with less conﬂict about task-related
issues [20].
Yet, in comparison to joint action in PM, the extent and
intensity of exchange is substantially smaller as information sharing focuses on informing alliance members about
issues and results of PM and not integrating them into PM.
It is less comprehensive in providing insights and a common understanding. Moreover, members merely receiving
information from other members cannot rule out that the
information provided is ﬁltered or even falsiﬁed [80]. In the
case of joint action, this situation is different as close
collaboration increases the ability for veriﬁcation and
norms and trust and in serving as effective means for
coordination and mitigating exchange hazards. Consequently, information sharing can be considered a ‘‘light’’
version of collaboration compared to joint action.
Thus, in alliances with symmetrical power relation,
information sharing has only little or even nothing to add to
the potentials created via joint action in PM, and thus, joint
action will be substantially more effective in mitigating
conﬂict in this context.
In contrast, when power is unevenly distributed, the less
dependent members are less interested in giving up
autonomy by establishing extensive collaborative processes
as ‘‘constant coordination and mutual adjustment among
group members is not necessary for the group to function
successfully’’ [20, p. 390]. Because joint action in PM is
not in the interest of the less dependent members, these
alliances can instead only rely on information sharing in
PM, which constitutes a less pronounced form of collaboration to mitigate conﬂict. From the SCT perspective, this
approach entails social contracts that differ from those of
joint action in the sense that it allows for one or a few
parties to dominate decisions on what and how much
information is exchanged. In that sense, information sharing is compatible with companies wanting to dominate,
while still providing potential to prevent conﬂict from
manifesting itself.
Consequently, information sharing in PM is an effective
approach to reduce affective and cognitive conﬂicts in
alliances with asymmetrical power relations, whereas in
symmetrical power relations this is not the case:
H2a,b Information sharing in PM is more effective in
reducing a) affective and b) cognitive conﬂict in horizontal
alliances with asymmetrical power relation than in ones
with symmetrical power relation.

3 Methodology
3.1 Sampling and data collection
For testing the hypotheses, primary data from LSPs were
collected. We employed a key informant approach [81] and
targeted senior managers of the LSPs to provide information regarding one horizontal LSP alliance they were active
in (here relationships with a subcontracting nature where
explicitly highlighted to be out of the scope of the survey).
The executive management level was chosen as appropriate point of contact due to the rather small company size in
the industry and in the sample (50 % of the surveyed LSPs
have less than 100 employees—see Table 1) and the fact
that the executive managers at LSPs are still involved even

Page 7 of 15 7
Table 1 Demographics of responding companies
Annual turnover (in €)

N

%

1–5 million

51

26

[5–25 million

57

30

[25–100 million

37

19

[100–500 million

22

11

[500 million–5 billion

9

5

[5 billion

2

1

Not speciﬁed

15

8

Total

193

100

Number of employees

N

%

1–50

64

33

51–100

31

16

101–500

44

23

501–1000

20

10

[1000

22

12

Not speciﬁed

12

6

193

100

Total

at the day-to-day level of cooperating with other LSPs in a
horizontal alliance.
We derived the sample from two commercial databases
that provide company data of German LSPs with annual
revenue of more than €1 million. The executive managers
received an email invitation with a personalized link to our
web-based survey in German language. Overall, a response
rate of 11.7 % was achieved. After discarding 18 responses
due to incomplete data and four responses because they
represented outliers as identiﬁed based on Mahalanobis
distance, 193 usable responses remained for the analyses
(see Table 1).
We followed established practices for testing non-response bias. First, answers of early and late responders
were compared [82]. Second, a follow-up study was conducted with 18 randomly chosen non-respondents, who
received a questionnaire with 12 items of the original
survey [83]. Their responses were compared to the ones of
the participants that completed the questionnaire in the ﬁrst
place. Neither method indicated signiﬁcant differences in
the data.
3.2 Measurement scales
For the constructs of the present hypothesized model, we
used previously established measurement scales and
adapted them to the current study. A qualitative pretest
with ten logistics researchers and seven CEOs of LSPs was
carried out to ensure face validity. In this process, few
minor alterations were made iteratively to the construct

The measurement of the constructs relied on multi-item,
7-point Likert-type scales presented in the Appendix 1 and
described in the following.
Joint action in PM was measured based on [64] and
refers to the extent to which PM activities are integrated
via coordination across alliance members. Information
sharing in PM was captured based on the scale of [84] and
refers to the extent to which the alliance members keep
each other informed about critical and proprietary information concerning PM. Cognitive conﬂict and affective
conﬂict were measured based on [33]. The construct for
cognitive conﬂict measures the extent to which task oriented conﬂicts were experienced, whereas the construct for
affective conﬂict identiﬁes the extent to which emotional
and personal incompatibilities or disputes were
experienced.
To capture the power structure, we used two scales of
[85]. The ﬁrms’ dependence on the alliance was assessed
by measuring to what extent the alliance was important to
them. The alliance’s dependency on the individual ﬁrm was
measured by asking for the extent to which the respondent’s company is important for the alliance. For the multigroup analysis, the sample was divided into two groups
based on the power structure that was calculated as the
absolute difference between the average score of the items
of the ﬁrst construct and the average score of the items of
the second construct. Values up to 0.75 were considered as
symmetrical power relation (N = 72) as the respondents’
company depends on the cooperation to a similar degree to
that the cooperation depends on it. Values above 0.75 were
considered as asymmetrical power relation (N = 121). The
rationale behind this cutoff was that if the majority of items
differed by at least one between the two constructs, the
relation would be considered asymmetrical. To ensure
robustness, we also tested a cutoff of 1.0 with two groups
of N = 84 and N = 109; the results of this model were
consistent with those of the 0.75 cutoff that will be reported
below in the Results section.
To validate the measurement scales, we conducted an
exploratory factor analysis using SPSS, extracting four
factors equivalent to our four focal constructs (see
Appendix 2). Subsequently, we conducted a conﬁrmatory
factor analysis with AMOS to assess the reliability and
validity of the measurement model, which revealed adequate ﬁt (v2 = 173.0 with df = 81; v2/df = 2.14;
CFI = 0.96; RMSEA = 0.077). All factor loadings were
signiﬁcant at p \ 0.001, supporting convergent validity for
the constructs. Item reliability exceeded 0.4 for all items.
The lowest Cronbach’s alpha and the lowest composite
reliability for the latent constructs are 0.86 (see Appendix

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:7

1). Additionally, [86] procedure to test discriminant
validity was used. The squared correlations between any
pair of the four constructs used were lower than the average
variance extracted of the corresponding constructs (see
Appendix 3).
3.3 Control variables
We aimed to control for cooperation size [87] and relationship duration [88]. The ﬁrst variable captures the
number of companies engaged in the alliance, whereas the
second variable captures the number of years the alliance
exists. This is intended to account for any inﬂuence that
the two variables may have on affective and cognitive
conﬂicts. During normality tests, these two variables
exhibited a relatively strong positive skew. Therefore, a
square-root-transformation on the original data was performed and, subsequently, the square root of cooperation
size and of relationship duration was used as control
variables.
3.4 Results
The structural equations model was tested by conducting a
multi-group analysis using AMOS to identify the moderating
effects of the power structure. The ﬁt indices showed adequate model ﬁt for the hypothesized model (v2 = 323.0 with
df = 210; v2/df = 1.54; CFI = 0.95; RMSEA = 0.05).
Table 2 presents the results of the hypothesized
relationships.
Hypotheses H1a,b, which postulate that joint action in
PM is more effective in reducing both forms of conﬂict in
symmetrical power relations than in asymmetrical ones, are
supported. In symmetrical power relations, joint action has
a signiﬁcant negative effect on affective conﬂict (-0.372;
p \ 0.05) and on cognitive conﬂict (-0.533; p \ 0.01). In
contrast, it has no signiﬁcant effect in asymmetrical power
relations, neither on affective conﬂict (0.178; n.s.), nor on
cognitive conﬂict (-0.122; n.s.). The differences between
symmetrical and asymmetrical power structures are signiﬁcant for both paths.
Hypotheses H2a,b posit that information sharing in PM is
more effective in reducing conﬂict in asymmetrical power
relations than in symmetrical ones. Our results fully support hypothesis H2a: Information sharing in PM has a signiﬁcant negative effect on affective conﬂict in
asymmetrical power relations (-0.455; p \ 0.01), whereas
the effect in a symmetrical power relation is nonsigniﬁcant
(?0.078; n.s.). Furthermore, the structural paths are signiﬁcantly different (p \ 0.01). At the same time, the effect

Table 2 Results of multi-group analysis with respect to power structure (unstandardized path coefﬁcients)
Power structure
Symmetrical

Hypothesis
Asymmetrical

Estimate

p

Joint action ? affective conﬂict (H1a)

-0.372

0.045

0.178

0.334

2.091

0.018

Support

Joint action ? cognitive conﬂict (H1b)

-0.533

0.003

-0.122

0.525

1.599

0.055

Support

0.078
0.082

0.620
0.554

-0.455
-0.225

0.002
0.134

-2.471
-1.499

0.007
0.067

Support
Weak support

Information sharing ? affective conﬂict (H2a)
Information sharing ? cognitive conﬂict (H2b)

Estimate

Difference

R2 affective conﬂict

12.6 %
29.6 %

z-score

p

20.8 %

R2 cognitive conﬂict

p

12.2 %

Bold values indicate signiﬁcant relationships

symmetrical power relations is also negative, but above the
signiﬁcance threshold (-0.225; p = 0.134). But again, the
moderation follows the hypothesized pattern (i.e., information sharing is more effective in asymmetrical power
relations), and this difference is signiﬁcant (p = 0.067), so
that weak support for H2b can be concluded.
Further, our results show that the explanatory power of
the two collaborative processes is substantial for symmetrical power relations; the R2 is 12.6 % for affective conﬂict
and 29.6 % for cognitive conﬂict. In asymmetrical power
relations, collaborative processes in PM account for a little
lower but still substantial percentage of variance in conﬂict
(R2 = 20.8 % for affective conﬂict and R2 = 12.2 % for
cognitive conﬂict) (see Table 2). With regards to our
control variables, we ﬁnd that neither the square root of
cooperation size, nor of relationship duration has a signiﬁcant effect on affective and cognitive conﬂicts (all
p values are above 0.4).

4 Discussion and implications
4.1 Theoretical implications
The results of this study present several important theoretical implications with respect to conﬂict in horizontal
alliances. Even though conﬂict has been studied extensively in prior research (e.g., [10, 11, 33]), the focus, so far,
was mainly on post-manifestation topics such as conﬂict
management, neglecting that conﬂict could be prevented
before emerging in the ﬁrst place. The major drawback of
the prior research that actually was concerned with conﬂict
prevention is that it mostly builds on antecedents of conﬂict
that are not really actionable, for example, the similarity of
organizational climate [62] or goal uncertainty [38].
Exceptions are the studies of [20], who tested the effect of

information sharing in student groups and its effect on
conﬂict and performance, and [18] who presented a model
of proactive approaches for handling conﬂicts such as
selecting partner ﬁt, partnership negotiation, and the build
up of relational quality among members in international
joint ventures. Here, our research provides one additional
step by focussing on actionable collaborative processes
(i.e., joint action and information sharing) in a concrete
environment (i.e., PM) that can be applied to contribute to
a reduction of the overall levels of affective and cognitive
conﬂicts within a horizontal cooperation. This, at the same
time, underscores that collaboration is an approach to
improve the performance of supply chain relationships
[89], and that PM is of key importance to horizontal alliances in that it not only is an area prone to conﬂict, but also
one with the potential to mitigate conﬂict.
To further reﬁne our assertions, we applied a contextspeciﬁc view based on RDT and SCT focussing on
autonomy of the involved LSPs and the social contracts
embedded in the alliance. Here, our ﬁndings ﬁrst underscore the prior assumption that how conﬂict emerges and
manifests itself depends on the context [21, 22] and that the
power structure within the cooperation is a relevant contextual variable [21, 24, 28].
Second, prior ﬁndings are expanded in showing that the
effectiveness of collaboration is not equal for symmetrical
and asymmetrical power relations. Overall, collaborative
processes in PM are effective in preventing conﬂict in both
setups. Yet, joint action is most effective in symmetrical
power relations, while information sharing is most effective in asymmetrical power relations. Conducting a mutual
approach such as joint action usually is based on alliance
members that all give up autonomy in the alliance and are
reciprocally dependent and hence interested in maintaining
or even intensifying a close relationship [48]. Otherwise
they would not be willing to both give and take in the

opinions, and know-how [48, 49]. Prior expectations were
that information sharing is rather effective in mitigating the
risk of conﬂict manifestation in asymmetrical power relations as in such a situation, the more powerful members are
less interested in reducing their autonomy and altering
social contracts by establishing processes that are involving
in nature [20]. In this case, stronger members rather prefer
information sharing where they can better steer which
information is disclosed. Our results were able to support
this. Thus, we show with our research that the suitability as
well as the effectiveness of collaborative processes is very
much dependent on the context (in this case, the power
structure) in which they are applied.
4.2 Managerial implications
The results of our study are of importance to practice in
that they provide guidance to managing horizontal alliances in particular. Our research provides managers with
insights on how to prevent conﬂict potential to manifest
itself in actual conﬂict.
The ﬁrst important aspect is that managers need to shift
their focus of attention from post-manifestation issues of
conﬂict (i.e., conﬂict management techniques after the
conﬂict has already emerged) to the question of how conﬂict can proactively be prevented. If conﬂict has already
emerged, it is difﬁcult to control [63] and necessitates
considerable effort to manage and resolve it [10, 43, 62]. In
this respect, the present research found that PM is an area
where conﬂicts can emerge, because within this area different viewpoints and approaches meet and clash.
Building on this, the results show that PM, besides being
a potential source of conﬂict, can also be utilized to remedy
this issue and to reduce the overall level of conﬂict—both
cognitive and affective—in an alliance. Keys to this are
processes such as joint action and information sharing in
PM, and such collaborative process can already be initiated
at the start of the alliance via contractual provisions [90].
However, their effectiveness to proactively prevent the
manifestation of conﬂict is highly dependent on the speciﬁc
context of the cooperation and speciﬁcally the inherent
power structure. In symmetrical power relations, where
members are cooperating on equal footing, managers
should focus on high participation and involvement during
the PM. This does not further impede the autonomy of the
alliance members and is consistent with the underlying
social contracts of the cooperation. This situation is very
different in asymmetrical power relation settings. Here,
where dependency and autonomy across alliance members
are unequally distributed, instead increased transparency
through information sharing is effective while joint action
of the alliance members is not effective in mitigating

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:7

conﬂict as it reduces member autonomy and runs counter to
the implicit social contracts of the alliance.
Thus, managers should be aware of the fact that, ﬁrst,
their focus should be on proactive rather than reactive
measures and, second, that when taking measures these
have to be chosen depending on the contextual situation
they ﬁnd themselves in.

5 Limitations and further research
In sum, this article provides sound results regarding conﬂict prevention in horizontal alliances in general and of
LSPs in particular. However, the qualiﬁcation of our conclusions necessitates an acknowledgment of limitations
inherent to this study.
First, the study focus was on horizontal cooperation.
Compared to vertical relationships, the mode of collaboration in horizontal alliances differs due to their often
multilateral setup [3]. This complicates collaborative processes as more than two companies are to be included.
Thus, due to the more straightforward arrangement of a
buyer–supplier relationship in vertical settings, the effectiveness of the different collaborative processes in PM may
be even more pronounced. In order to examine potential
differences in the effectiveness, we encourage the replication of our study for vertical relationships. Second, this
study used data from the logistics industry. This is an
industry in which fear of competition is high while at the
same time utilizing horizontal cooperation is very common. Therefore, we expect the conﬂict-reducing potential
of collaborative process to be higher than in other industries, while we do not expect any differences in the
underlying general mechanisms of conﬂict prevention. To
investigate potential differences to other service industries,
corresponding research is encouraged. Last, we limit our
consideration to PM. We also suggest testing the role of
joint action and information sharing in other areas of horizontal cooperation. Here, it could be promising to also
view less central activities to view how conﬂict in
peripheral areas may also infect collaboration in central
activities.2
