

The key difference, in the context of this research, between independent remanufacturers and OEM and contract remanufacturers is in terms of cores. Cores are the used
products at the end of their working life. In almost all cases for the contract and OEM
remanufacturer the customers are responsible for return of cores with the remanufacturer having little control over the quantity, mix or quality of returns. Generally the
OEM remanufacturer is separate from general production, so the OEM can be considered a customer to the remanufacturer. This can have a significant impact on ability to
supply customers as the cores received cannot be guaranteed to match the mix of
remanufactured units required by the customer. In addition, contract remanufacturers
operate with fixed cost contracts that allow for little or no additional charge to be made
for badly damaged or incorrect cores. The actual remanufacturing process varies by
product and methods such as material deposition that may be appropriate for more expensive components, such as cylinder blocks, would not necessarily be suitable for
remanufacturing lower cost products such as mobile phones. Nevertheless the overall
process regardless of product can be described as in the Fig. 1 [10].
Many authors ([5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 14, 23, 25, 26] etc.) acknowledge that uncertainty about
the quality (and often the quantity) of cores has a detrimental effect on the productivity
and profitability of remanufacturers. Errington [5] describes the use of core inspection
to eliminate products and components that would be either prohibitively expensive or
extremely difficult to remanufacture. This is particularly useful to independent remanufacturers, especially where they do not have an identified customer for their product,
but contract remanufacturers often have very little choice when specific customer demand exists regardless of the supplied quantity or quality of cores.
Inspection is a fundamental part of any remanufacturing process ([7, 11, 18, 19] etc.). It
is usual practice in remanufacturing to inspect at many stages through the process, often
functionally and in all cases visually. Brent and Steinhilper [2] as well as Ijomah [11]
amongst others state that 100 % inspection is always required at one or more of the remanufacturing phases. The result of this is a high quality product for customers but lowered
profitability for the remanufacturer. This is due to the uncertainty concerning the quality
and condition of the returned products. Literature suggests that there is a strategic benefit
in core sorting [17] and recommend grading cores for quality to improve the disassembly


process [5]. Teunter [25] go further and propose four grades of cores as part of their
acquisition policy. All these authors note that there is a benefit (unquantified) to remanufacturers when they are able to process high quality cores.
This research, to determine whether and by how much the overall remanufacturing
process of engines could be made more efficient with a robust inspection of cores, was
carried out at the Caterpillar Remanufacturing Services (a division of Caterpillar Inc.)
facility in Rushden, U.K. This facility primarily remanufactured petrol and diesel
engines both as an OEM for Caterpillar Inc. and as a contract remanufacturer for a
variety of other OEMs. Remanufacturing is a mature business in the automotive sector
and consequently offers an ideal environment for experimental research. The researcher’s
employment at the facility as a production manager also facilitated unprecedented access
over an extended period to all aspects of the remanufacturing process.

Methodology
The research utilized a mixed mode approach where qualitative information was
collected via semi- structured interviews and observations. The quantitative part of the
research methodology was the use of experiments true experimentation [3]. A summary of the methodology follows due to space constraints however; further details can
be obtained from Ridley [22].

Independent variables

The aim of the research was to understand whether the overall remanufacturing
process could be made more efficient by a robust regime of pre-processing inspection.
It was consequently important to understand which elements of the inspection resulted
in the greatest benefits. Therefore the content of the pre-processing inspection, the independent variable in the experiment, was manipulated by the researcher. Four inspection protocols were developed, limited by the technology available in the
remanufacturing facility. These were:
 Protocol 1: No inspection, decant, establish part number and reuse. This protocol

was to test whether inspection of core made any material difference.
 Protocol 2: Decant, establish part number, brief visual, external inspection and
determining one of three grading. Either, 1) Use as regular cores, 2) close to
new – bypass the usual process or 3) severely damaged – use as a parts donor.
This was the usual process and used as the baseline.
 Protocol 3 Protocol 2 plus manual rotation of moving parts, visual and scent
inspection of rotating electrics and close inspection of open ports and oil ways.
This latter inspection is commonly known by practitioners as the “scratch and sniff”
test because burnt electric components can often be detected from their smell.
 Protocol 4 Protocol 3 plus inspection using a fibre optic endoscope to investigate
the internal condition of cylinder bores, turbochargers, alternators etc.
Instructions detailing the exact work content for each individual protocol were
produced and operators were given training in the specifics of each one. The output

This sheet noted the unique core number, the specific OEM part number and the
outcome of the inspection dependent upon the protocol used.
Dependent variables

The overriding factor in the choice of dependent variables was the ability to measure
the direct effects of the experimental treatments. Processing time for each remanufacturing activity, from unpacking and inspection to final post-production testing, was able
to be measured both at individual component/sub-assembly level and at overall engine
level and consequently became the dependent variable. An engine is an assembly of
individual components and smaller assemblies and, as a consequence, provided opportunities to establish whether the experimental treatments were equally effective on a
variety of differing materials, complexities and scales. Measurement of the overall
processing time would establish whether the benefits of the inspection protocols
outweighed the scale of the intervention. Four engines were selected, representing a
variety of customers and a relatively large volume of product. The selections were
designed to promote the ability to generalize the findings.
 Engine A - 4 cylinder engine with a capacity of less than 2 litres. This engine was

supplied to the customer at a long engine level. This comprised: cylinder block
assembled with pistons, connecting-rods, crankshaft, fully assembled and timed
cylinder head, oil sump, oil pump, timing gear and outer covers.
 Engine B - 6 cylinder engine of a capacity greater than 2 litres. This engine was
also supplied to the customer at a long engine level comprising: cylinder block
assembled with pistons, connecting-rods, crankshaft, fully assembled and timed
cylinder head, oil sump, oil pump, timing gear, outer covers and vacuum pump.
 Engine C - 4 cylinder engine with a capacity greater than 2 litres. This engine was
supplied to the customer at a fully dressed level. This comprised: cylinder block
assembled with pistons, connecting-rods, crankshaft, fully assembled and timed
cylinder head, oil sump, oil pump, timing gear, outer covers, vacuum pump, fuel
lift pump, exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) valve, starter motor, alternator, flywheel,
turbocharger and fuel injection equipment.
 Engine D - 6 cylinder engine with a capacity greater than 2 litres. This engine was
supplied to the customer at a fully dressed level. This comprised: cylinder block
assembled with pistons, connecting-rods, crankshaft, fully assembled and timed
cylinder head, oil sump, oil pump, timing gear, outer covers, vacuum pump, fuel
lift pump, compressor, turbocharger and fuel injection equipment.
Each activity that forms the overall remanufacturing process, disassembly, cleaning,
any appropriate salvage activities, reassembly and testing was timed for each component
or sub-assembly of each engine in order that any changes could be identified. In total
2196 engines were investigated.
Design of experiments

The experiments were constructed from a post-test only control group, designed using
the “Solomon Four group design” method [24] as a template to ensure all variables
were covered. Engines of each type were randomly assigned upon receipt, sight-unseen,

inspection protocols were then applied, one to each group, and the processing times for
each activity measured. Both the protocols and their application were randomised and so
at any one time engines of all four types subjected to any one of all four protocols were
passing through the facility. The research design assumes that inspection protocol 2,
which is the existing level of pre-inspection prior to the experiments being conducted, is
the equivalent of no treatment and that all groups subjected to this protocol form the
control group. Essentially this is just a transfer of the control from the experimental
groups and to the treatment. In all cases, R represents randomisation of the group, X
represents a treatment, a pre-processing protocol, (X1, X2 etc.) and O represents a group,
an engine in this research (O1, O2 etc.). The overall design is represented in Fig. 2.
This design satisfies all the concerns of validity: having a control group, involving the
manipulation of one independent variable and measuring all of the dependent variables.
It also satisfies the recommendations of Charness et al. [4] by combining betweensubject and within-subject design.

Randomisation of subjects

Randomisation of the experimental subjects was an essential part of the experiment in
order that both the internal and external validity be maintained. Cores typically arrived
at the Rushden remanufacturing facility from collection sites after consolidation. No
information was available concerning the condition, quality or use history for any cores.
Cores were often shipped under generic part numbers that encompassed a range of
similar engines rather than by individual part number, a consequence of the earlier
consolidation process. This meant that the cores were a random mix both of specific
part number and of condition. Each core was randomly assigned a unique tracking
number and all components removed were identified with that number.
The decision to assign a protocol at receipt but not to inspect until a core was
required for production was driven by two factors: the need to disrupt normal working
practices as little as possible, and the need to minimise the cost impact of the


experiment. Disruption of normal working practices more than was necessary to
administer the treatments was undesirable because it might introduce unforeseen
variables that could contaminate the results. The allocation of a unique tracking
number ensured that once the engine was passed to disassembly none of the up-stream
operatives were able to determine which inspection protocol had been applied to which
engines or components. This further anonymity aided internal validity as operatives
could not alter their behaviour based on any assumptions about the components being
processed. All activities were kept within normal production boundaries in order that
individual operators could exert no influence on the outcome of the experiments.

Data collection and integrity

The nature of the experiment and the quantity of cores involved meant that a considerable amount of data would be collected. It would be impossible for one person to collect
all of the results, particularly as many of the operations were undertaken simultaneously.
The primary concern therefore became the ability to ensure data integrity if the collection
of processing times was dispersed amongst operators. Processing times were captured in
decimal minutes and collated in spreadsheet form for analysis. The data collection
required for this experiment was part of the data normally collected by operators and
consequently the only additional requirement was that the unique tracking number was
recorded alongside the processing time. A slight change to the recording sheet made this
a simple adjustment for operators. All the operators involved noted the times against the
unique tracking numbers. Operators were instructed to record the time displayed on the
stopwatch at the end of the process exactly as displayed and not to round up or down.
Processing times included all operations that a component was subjected to during that
activity where the operator was involved. Therefore cycle times in machines such as wash
machines where there was no operator involvement were not recorded as part of the
processing time but if the operator was required to be present the entire time, for instance
during the post-production test, this period was included in the processing time.

The experimental audit process

An audit process to check data recorded by operators was already in place at the
Rushden facility and a more frequent version of this system was used to verify the data
collection. Using this system ensured that operatives experienced working conditions
that were as near as possible to usual. This was important to ensure that operators did
not alter their behaviour because of the experiments and in some way influence the
data collected. Sample size was calculated on the basis of the predicted data population
of around 30,000 entries. The large amount of data being collected (the entire population rather than a sample) meant that there was high confidence that any statistical
significance would be directly attributable to treatments and consequently setting the α
value at 0.05 and thus the confidence at 95 % could be justified [15]. The calculation of
sample size based on those parameters required a 7.14 % sample size or 2427.6 parts.
This equated to one component in every fifteen. The existing audit scheme was
modified to satisfy the requirements of the research design whilst remaining intrinsically the same in order to reassure the operators. All audits during the experimental

Results, analysis and discussion
Results were collected and analysed for all four of the subject engines but only those
for engine C are presented here owing to the quantity of data and journal paper length
constraints. Full data and analysis can be found in Ridley [22]. The results from the
across-engine analysis of all four engines showed consistent patterns across engines
and engine components; consequently engine C was selected as it has the greatest
number of constituent components and sub-assemblies can be said to be the most
representative of the research as a whole.
Engine C results

A total of 420 type C engines were examined during the experimental phase. These
were randomly allocated on arrival to the four inspection protocols in the following
quantities:
 Protocol 1 – 104 engines;
 Protocol 2 – 105 engines;
 Protocol 3 – 105 engines; and
 Protocol 4 – 106 engines

Engine C was a 4 cylinder engine with a capacity of more than 2 litres.
Table 1 shows the percentage change in mean time from the control (protocol 2) for
each remanufacturing activity and each protocol.
It can be seen that whilst engines inspected to protocols 1 and 2 have a much lower
time for the decant and inspect activity (the application of the protocol), the overall
remanufacturing process time is higher than for those engines inspected to protocols 3
and 4, despite their longer decant and inspect activity times. In these latter two cases,
the benefits greatly outweigh the additional work. The table also shows that not all
activities within the remanufacturing process benefit in the same way from the increasing
levels of inspection.
Analysis of engine C results

The primary analysis across all the results was within-engine as this clearly demonstrated
whether the treatment applied had any effect as each component set was similar. A
secondary cross-engine analysis was conducted to establish similarities between engine
sub-assemblies and components to better identify any commonalities that would enable a
generic inspection methodology to be established. Analysis of the overall data set for each
engine used IBMs Statistical Processing for Social Scientists (SPSS) package and specifically using one-way ANOVA [13]. One-way ANOVA was selected because there are four
randomly selected groups (the four engine types) who together constitute the entire
population. The within-engine analysis for engine C is presented here. The tabular and
graphical outputs from SPSS are shown in full only for the overall remanufacturing process.
Statistical correlation

Statistical analysis was carried out for each activity time in the remanufacturing process

Page 8 of 12

Table 1 Percentage change in mean activity times from the control – engine C
Activity

% change in mean time from control
Protocol 1
−21.61

Decant and Inspect

Protocol 2

Protocol 3

Protocol 4

Control

23.66

85.85

10.35

Control

−20.06

−20.06

Block Remanufacture

3.12

Control

0.63

−0.83

Head Remanufacture

Disassembly

−0.39

Control

−3.88

−3.10

Crankshaft Remanufacture

0.03

Control

−1.23

−1.20

Camshaft Remanufacture

−0.17

Control

0.04

−0.06

0.38

Control

0.13

0.17

Connecting Rods

−0.01

Control

−0.02

0.20

Rocker Shaft Remanufacture

−0.08

Control

−0.05

−0.10

Oil Pump Remanufacture

Valve Remanufacture

−0.01

Control

0.06

−0.04

Fuel Lift Pump Remanufacture

3.96

Control

−1.33

−0.53

EGR Valve Remanufacture

1.14

Control

−3.78

−3.83

Vacuum Pump Remanufacture

0.20

Control

−0.08

−0.88

Starter Motor Remanufacture

7.26

Control

−17.58

−19.54

Alternator Remanufacture

7.83

Control

−6.68

−9.42

Flywheel Remanufacture

1.06

Control

−1.46

−3.10

Turbocharger Remanufacture

4.15

Control

−16.70

−18.61

Small Parts Remanufacture

5.85

Control

−13.52

−13.31

Engine Kitting

9.31

Control

−4.07

−3.64

−0.21

Control

−0.30

−0.32

0.19

Control

0.04

0.02

−0.02

Control

−0.04

−0.03

2.74

Control

−5.36

−5.27

Engine Assembly
Post-Production Test
Paint, Pack and Despatch
Overall Remanufacture

correlation between the increased inspection and the subsequent remanufacturing
activity time. The results of this analysis for the overall remanufacturing activity time
for engine C only are given here.
The collected data for the overall remanufacturing process for engine C comprised a
total of 420 individual times across all four inspection protocols. These were subject to
one-way ANOVA analysis giving the results shown in Table 2. The significance of the
results is the confidence with which it can be said that the change in processing time
was due to the effects of the differing pre-processing inspection protocol. The confidence level for the population was determined to be 95 % based both upon the large
size of the population and the use of data from the whole population rather than a
sample [15]. Therefore the ANOVA significance figure must be lower than 0.05 for the
results to demonstrate a statistically material benefit with the required 95 % level of
Table 2 ANOVA output for engine C, overall processing time
Overall remanufacturing process
Sum of squares

Df

Mean square

F

Significance

Between Groups

2244064.267

3

748021.422

11352.218

0.000

Within Groups

27411.110

416

65.892

Total




confidence. The strength of the correlation is given by the Significance in Table 2 where
the maximum correlation is 0 and the minimum correlation is 1, therefore any result
lower than 0.05 shows a strong correlation. The significance figure for the ANOVA
analysis on the overall remanufacturing process for engine C was 0.000 as shown in
Table 2. Therefore it is possible to be confident that the effect of increasing the content
of the pre-processing inspection has been a material reduction in the overall processing
time of the engine.
It was previously noted that the effects of increasing the pre-processing inspection
did not bring a benefit in all activities and the full analysis of each activity for engine C
demonstrates this. As an example, Table 3 shows the difference in activity time between
protocols 1 and 3 and the statistical correlation (significance) for each of the individual
remanufacturing activities. Once again the strength of the correlation is given by the
Significance in Table 2 where the maximum correlation is 0 and the minimum correlation
is 1, therefore any result lower than 0.05 shows a strong correlation. Negative numbers
denote a decrease in time between activities times at protocols 1 and 3, positive numbers
an increase.
The within-engine analysis also revealed a limit to the benefits accrued from the
increasing content of the inspection protocols and this is illustrated in Fig. 3 which
plots the overall remanufacturing time for every engine C studied. It clearly shows that
the processing time drops as the pre-processing inspection content is increased until
Table 3 Statistical correlation between protocols 1 and 3 for engine C
Remanufacturing activity
Decant and Inspect
Disassembly

Time difference (minutes)

Significance

5.90

0.000

−40.31

0.000

Block Remanufacture

−2.92

0.000

Head Remanufacture

−3.28

0.000

Crankshaft Remanufacture

−0.58

0.000

Camshaft Remanufacture

0.04

0.972

−0.08

0.472

0.00

0.879

Valve Remanufacture
Connecting Rods
Rocker Shaft Remanufacture

0.00

0.996

Oil Pump Remanufacture

0.01

0.995

Fuel Lift Pump Remanufacture

−0.31

0.000

EGR Valve Remanufacture

−0.56

0.000

−0.03

0.509

−18.78

0.000

Alternator Remanufacture

−6.87

0.000

Flywheel Remanufacture

−0.39

0.000

Vacuum Pump Remanufacture
Starter Motor Remanufacture

Turbocharger Remanufacture

−33.35

0.000

Small Parts Remanufacture

−24.09

0.000

Engine Kitting

−14.66

0.000

−0.34

0.061

Engine Assembly
Post-Production Test

−0.26

0.114

Paint, Pack and Despatch

−0.06

0.217

−140.90


Fig. 3 Mean remanufacturing time for engine C across each protocol

protocol 4 when the benefit is curtailed. The benefits still outweigh the additional time
required for further inspection but no further benefit from inspecting additional
elements than at protocol 3 is seen.

Discussion

It can be seen from the results shown that increasing the content of the pre-processing
inspection activity provided a significant benefit for some components and not others.
It is possible in most cases to detect underlying themes that group these components
together and explain the differences.
The benefits do necessarily continue to accrue as the pre-processing inspection content
increases as shown in Fig. 3 but are limited. This is because there is a finite amount of
information concerning the condition of components that can be ascertained prior to
disassembly and consequently once that point is reached, further inspection adds to the
processing time without providing a commensurate benefit.
Significantly altered remanufacturing activities or components include: disassembly,
cylinder block, cylinder head, crankshaft, alternator, fuel lift pump, EGR valve, starter
motor, turbocharger, flywheel, small parts salvage and engine kitting.
These latter have at least one of the following characteristics:
 Complex geometry including internal ports;
 Large number of sub-components; or
 Constructed from or comprising of multiple materials.

These characteristics make pre-processing inspection worthwhile because they all
introduce additional variables to the remanufacturing activity. Components with
complex geometry are more likely to be affected by a build-up of contaminants or to
experience wear or corrosion on changing surface forms. This is particularly noticeable
on turbochargers where the complex blade profile experiences more corrosion than the

conditions. Likewise components that have either a large number of sub-components
or are constructed from multiple metals can be subject to corrosion aggravated by
contact between differing materials or the inconsistent wear and fatigue created by the
repetitive hot and cold cycling of an engine. Water and coolant pumps often exhibit
these types of wear patterns particularly around the turbine and shaft joints where the
differing metals increase the corrosion at the joint.
The benefits accrue from the knowledge obtained at the point of inspection. This
information was used to inform the scheduling and procurement operations enabling
less material to be purchased because of assumed requirements but rather purchased
against a known demand. Longer term this allowed inventory levels to reduce. This
latter cannot be quantified as it was ongoing at the point at which the research ended.
The knowledge gained also partly mitigated the effects of uncertainty (noted by
remanufacturers as a very significant issue) because early knowledge of part number,
condition and type of received cores enabled additional cores of a suitable type to be
sourced in time to meet demand. The results noted for engine C were consistent with
those seen in the other three engines and consequently it can be inferred that components
with these characteristics or activities involving parts with the same demonstrate a
reduction in their overall processing time but that this benefit is curtailed once the limit
of information gained by inspection is reached.
The researcher’s position within the remanufacturer made it possible to adopt a true
experimental design ([3, 21] etc.). This was because an external party would not have
been allowed access to the extent of company information and operator time required.
A control group was used to ensure internal validity. Other threats to validity were
negated by the randomisation of subjects into treatment groups [1].

Conclusion, research limitation and future work
This research has identified the factors that affect decisions concerning pre-processing
inspection. It concludes that for components having either complex geometry (such as
internal ports), a large number of sub-components or that are constructed from, or
comprising of, multiple materials, the remanufacturing process is shortened by
increased inspection prior to processing. However, these benefits are currently limited
by the amount of information that can be gained from the inspection methods used.
The experimentation was limited by the available tools and techniques for inspecting
cores and could be extended with the use of other non-destructive technology such as
ultrasound testing. It was also based exclusively in the automotive sector and
concerned engines and components thus new research to discover whether the factors
identified were applicable to other remanufactured products would be beneficial. The
main immediate thrust of further research will be to make the findings of the work
accessible to those in industry by translating them into a tool to aid decision-making
about appropriate pre-processing inspection.
