

1 Introduction
The dramatic use of communication technologies (wired
and wireless), embedded systems as well as increasing
penetration of the Internet has not only revolutionalized
human lives, but also reshaped almost all types of business

models and processes [1]. M2M communication is one of
the emerging technologies which offers ubiquitous connectivity among intelligent devices, hence is one of the
major enablers of the Internet-of-Things (IoTs) vision [2].
IoT is an innovative concept which offers to connect smart
devices often called things endowed with several sensing,
automation as well as computing capabilities, with the
Internet [3]. Resultantly, the connected devices are revolutionalizing the future cyber physical systems, yielding
several applications. Moreover, the mobile network operators are partnering with industrial organizations in order to
bring forth innovative IoT services to facilitate end consumers. For instance, M2M applications include intelligent
transportations, logistics and supply chain management,
e-health, smart metering, surveillance and security, smart
cities, and home automation [4–6]. Thus, M2M communication is foreseen to reshape the business of operators,
service providers, M2M enterprises, and M2M enablers [7].
Vodafone revealed that M2M communication is
becoming one of the driving forces for businesses which
inspires to bring forth innovative solutions almost in every
sector such as logistics, automotive industry, cities, homes,
schools, and workplaces [8]. Approximately 90 % of the
companies worldwide have adopted M2M technology and
imparted it as one of the most favorable technologies for
achieving noticeable outcomes. Automotive industry is one
of the top sectors for adopting M2M technology. Approximately 32 and 17 % increasing growth rates for adopting
M2M technology have been noticed in automotive and
logistic sectors, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. Thus, ITS
and logistics are considered as one of the potential M2M
users worldwide [9]. In addition, NOKIA forecasted that
the use of M2M technology in automotive industry and
logistical processes will dominate other applications in the
future [10]. One of the major motivations is to deliver a
fully managed infrastructure which primarily guarantees,
e.g., safe and secure driving, in time delivery, smart
monitoring, and tracking of assets. Resultantly, this can
revolutionize the existing methods of transportation and
freight movements. In addition, optimum system performance can be achieved by reducing factor of costs, pollution and emission of harmful gases.
Mobile M2M communication greatly differs from traditional human-to-human (H2H) communication in terms
of trafﬁc density, data packet size, and quality of service
(QoS) requirements [11]. For instance, an experimental
study done in [12] shows that M2M trafﬁc exhibits a signiﬁcantly different behavior than the traditional smartphone trafﬁc in various aspects. For example, unlike
traditional mobile trafﬁc, M2M is an uplink1 dominant
trafﬁc which particularly generates bursty trafﬁc volumes.
1

Sending information from M2M devices to base station.

123

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:15

AdopƟon of M2M technology in industry – 2015

Energy and UƟliƟes
AutomoƟve

Retail

19%

17%

Consumer electronics

37%
32%

28%
29%

e-healthcare
LogisƟcs

32%

Manufacturing

Fig. 1 An illustration of leading industries adoption M2M technology worldwide, based on the Vodafone report 2015 [8]

Besides, it also exhibits unique characteristics such as an
increasing device volume, sending small payloads, the
demand for various mobility proﬁles, time-controlled, and
mainly delay tolerant. Since the spectrum for mobile networks will remain a scarce resource, efﬁcient utilization of
radio spectrum is one of its major requirements. Therefore,
the objective of this paper is to exploit LTE-Advanced RNs
to multiplex small-sized M2M data packets in order to
ensure efﬁcient LTE-Advanced radio resource utilization
and thus to support a large number of devices.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We ﬁrstly
present an overview of the leading communication technologies used in ITS and logistics, followed by a generic
overview of the two latest technologies, i.e., the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.11p and
3GPP LTE-Advanced in Sect. 2. An overview of major
M2M services in ITS and logistics are discussed in Sect. 2.
Then, we discuss problem deﬁnitions by highlighting how
LTE-Advanced resources can be used inefﬁciently by
smart M2M devices in Sect. 3. Section 4 presents the
proposed uplink M2M data multiplexing scheme [13]. The
simulation environment and parameter settings are presented in Sect. 5. We discuss our simulation results in
Sect. 6. In the end, conclusions are drawn in Sect. 7. In
addition, a list of most frequently used acronyms is presented in Table 1.

2 Mobile M2M communications
This section presents an overview of ETSI (European
Telecommunications Standards Institute) M2M architecture followed by the major M2M use cases and services in
transportation and logistics.
2.1 ETSI M2M architectural overview
The high-level ETSI M2M network architecture is shown
in Fig. 2 [14]. The major components of mobile M2M
communication architecture include the device, communication as well as server domains. The primary functionality

Table 1 List of used abbreviations
Abbreviation

Acronym

MAC

Medium Access Control

MME

Mobility Management Entity

PHY

Physical Layer

PRB

Physical Resource Block

QCI

QoS Class Identiﬁers

RLC

Radio Link Control

RRC

Radio Resource Control

SAE

System Architecture Evolution

S-GWs

Serving Gateways

SGSN

Serving GPRS Support Node

TTI
WLAN

Transmission Time Interval
Wireless Local Area Network

WPAN

Wireless Personal Area Network

WSN

Wireless Sensor Network

as the internal temperature and humidity level of a container, position and speed of a vehicle, and fuel consumption. The role of the communication network is to
create a communication path between the devices and
servers through either wired or wireless networks such as
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) and cellular networks (e.g.,
LTE-Advanced), respectively. Finally, the server domain
consists of a middleware layer where the collected packets
go through several application services and later are used
by related agencies. Thus, M2M technology employs
wired, wireless, and hybrid communication opportunities
among devices to ensure a fully automatic acquisition,
processing, and transmission of data. Thus, M2M represents a broad next-generation technology that is primarily
incorporated in modern automobile industries to improve
the ease, safety, and quality of human life. The wired
access technologies provide less delay, high throughput
and are more reliable. Despite the aforementioned capabilities, wired systems cannot be used in transport and
logistical systems due to several limitations such as lack of
scalability, cost efﬁciency, and mobility. However, abovementioned limitations can be overcome by incorporating
wireless (cellular) technologies to achieve maximum system efﬁciency and reliability.
Recently, the key emerging wireless technologies used
in modern transport and logistical systems include IEEE
802.11p [15] (standardized to support vehicular communication) and 3GPP2 LTE-Advanced mobile networks [16].
IEEE 802.11p is achieved by making few advancements in
well-known 802.11 Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
technology. It is also considered as the most feasible
2

3rd Generation Partnership Project—3GPP—is the leading standardization organization for mobile networks.

15

technology for Vehicular Ad hoc Networks (VANET).
IEEE 802.11p wireless access introduces minimum delay
in ITS. However, its employment is limited due to its
decentralized nature. The recent research has revealed that
maximum operating efﬁciency of IEEE 802.11p can be
achieved by supporting it with the LTE-Advanced mobile
networks. The main features of LTE-Advanced technology
include wide availability of modules/devices, system
existence, decreased costs as well as easy deployment.
Since the cellular modules and sensors are easily available,
e.g., in vehicles, the applications of LTE-Advanced mobile
networks are dramatically increasing in automotive sector.
The authors in [16–18] compared the performance of
two different technologies under varying channel and
trafﬁc load conditions. Moreover, several issues due to
decentralized nature of IEEE 802.11p are highlighted in
[16]. For instance, the main shortcomings are less reliability due to uncoordinated Medium Access Control
(MAC) procedures, risk of network congestion, higher
vehicle mobility, and low scalability. Moreover, the number of network-connected vehicles adversely affect the
performance of the standard system. On the other hand,
LTE-Advanced networks are more reliable, scalable, and
capable of supporting higher density of vehicles. In addition, the authors analyzed the performance of the above
technologies in terms of delay, reliability, scalability, and
mobility support. The authors concluded that 3GPP LTEAdvanced systems are more efﬁcient in terms of high
scalability and mobility support than IEEE 802.11p standard. However, it is further concluded that the performance
of IEEE 802.11p is more sensitive during increased density, trafﬁc load, and higher mobility.
2.2 M2M use cases
Mobile M2M communication offers manifold applications
and services in modern transport and logistical processes
such as onboard security, trafﬁc and infrastructure management, ﬂeet management, and route planning [19]. In
case of an emergency, the collected data are sent to other
vehicles as well as infrastructure to gain immediate attention. To avoid further incidents, communication between
the infrastructure and the vehicles must be very fast to
detect emergency messages and deliver warning messages
immediately. Similarly, trafﬁc and infrastructure management play a prominent role in handling the problem of road
congestion. It tackles the problem by providing two-way
communication opportunities between vehicles and
infrastructure. Vehicles can send status updates about the
position, speed, fuel consumption, and delivery status
reports to the infrastructure and can also receive relevant
instructions about road accidents and emergency braking
system [20]. Moreover, M2M communications support


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:15

Backend server (e.g.,
transportaƟon
control center)
Gateway

DeNB: Donor eNB
Downlink:
Uplink:

Mobile communicaƟon
domain (e.g., LTEAdvanced)
DeNB

ApplicaƟon domain
(e.g., ITS and
logisƟcs)

DeNB

DeNB

DeNB
Smart sensors deployed to
monitor temperature, humidity,
pressure, power, water, etc.

Inventory

Accidental/emergency
uplink informaƟon

Downlink informaƟon
unicast/broadcast to
all devices (vehicles)

Vehicles cross talk for on-board
security, status update, ﬂeet
management, etc.

Warehouse management
(monitoring all sensors deployed
for various metering operaƟons)

Fig. 2 ETSI mobile M2M communication architecture along with an overview of major M2M applications in intelligent transportation and
logistics, based on [14]

several operations such as tracking of a stolen vehicle,
trafﬁc reports, and route planning as well as infotainment
services [6]. For instance, to recover a stolen vehicle, SVT
(Stolen Vehicle Tracking) service providers request data
about the location from Telematic Control Unit (TCU)
located inside the vehicle. In addition, drivers are also
updated by sending reports regarding trafﬁc in a particular
region so that they can change or plan new routes in case of
trafﬁc jam or an emergency. Furthermore, infotainment
services aim to provide news/information to drivers and
passengers through mobile TV, web-browsing, etc.
Fleet management is also one of the major M2M
applications in logistics [9]. The movements of vehicles,
containers, buses, and cars are being tracked regularly
through devices which collect data of the location, vehicle
speed, temperature, distribution progress, fuel consumption
and send this information to monitoring servers. Through
regular monitoring, several activities of the system can be
performed in an efﬁcient way. For instance, the goods
which are transported from one place to another are monitored regularly in order to accomplish in time delivery and
to handle any undesirable situation during shipment processes. The cargo moves across several regions; therefore,
it must be monitored in order to stay updated. Moreover,
reporting gives the exact location of the freight, and thus
the conditions of the objects can be easily monitored. In
applications such as warehouse management, ﬂeet management, robotics, and control systems, alarms are also
used to detect critical or emergency situations.

123

In addition to the above applications, M2M communication provides additional services in logistics such as
decreased operational cost, high inventory ﬂexibility,
increased supply chain visibility, and reduced loss of
vehicles and containers [21]. In supply chains, M2M
technology enables tracking the status of goods in real-time
via M2M devices. This increasing visibility allows for
signiﬁcant reduction in uncertainties in supply chain [22].
Similarly, in a warehouse, M2M devices can be deployed
to track the inventory so that stockholders and enterprises
can respond to the market dynamics and to decide when to
reﬁll and when to go on sale. Moreover, cross talk among
vehicles can also be effective to get immediate assistance.
Additionally, direct delivery of inventory from one vehicle
to another without storing it in a warehouse can also be
accomplished through mutual information sharing. Consequently, it can signiﬁcantly reduce the required space of
warehouse, customer’s waiting time as well as the operational costs for business entities.

3 Problem descriptions
Mobile systems such as LTE-Advanced are mainly
designed to support the increasing traditional mobile trafﬁc
by enabling improved broadband services [23]. For
instance, Ericsson in its mobility report [24] anticipates
Zero padding (%)

80.00
70.00
60.00
50.00
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
0.00
0

2

4

6

8

10

15

values, e.g., 20–26 representing favorable channel conditions, the capacity of the PRB increases. However, small
packets with increasing percentage of padded zeros are
transmitted. This shows that more packets can be accommodated per PRB under favorable channel conditions in
the given exemplary scenarios. Since mobile radio
resources are valuable assets and scarcely available, it is
required to ensure efﬁcient utilization of radio resources for
M2M communications.

Device payload (%)

90.00

UƟlizaƟon/PRB in %

Page 5 of 11

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

MCS Index

4 Proposed M2M data multiplexing
Fig. 3 An example illustration of inefﬁcient PRB utilization for
M2M communication

massive mobile trafﬁc, several enhancements in existing
LTE systems [25] such as Relay Nodes (RNs) [26], massive Multiple Input–Multiple Output (MIMO) systems
[27], and femto cells [28] were introduced to fulﬁll the
IMT-Advanced (International Mobile Telecommunications
Advanced) demands of maximum throughput of upto 1
Gbps in downlink and 500 Mbps in uplink [29]. On the
other hand, mobile standards are foreseen as an attractive
option to support future M2M applications such as in
transportation, logistics, smart city, and living [2]. Several
forecasts have also reported a considerable market growth
for M2M device volume, making quality of service provisioning a huge challenge [10]. Consequently, mobile
networks will not be able to support the increasing number
of M2M devices worldwide [30].
According to 3GPP, the smallest unit of the radio
spectrum allocatable to a single device is 1 PRB3 which is
capable of transmitting several hundred bits under favorable channel conditions. However, allocating 1 PRB to a
single M2M device used in transportation/logistics could
signiﬁcantly degrade radio spectrum utilization
[13, 19, 31]. This is due to the fact that the capacity of a
PRB can be much higher than the actual size of the device
payload under favorable channel conditions. Figure 3
illustrates how inefﬁciently a PRB can be utilized when a
device sends small-sized packets when experiencing good
channel conditions. An exemplary device payload of 4
bytes is considered in order to evaluate the utilization of a
PRB against all the possible values of the Modulation and
Coding Scheme (MCS). A PRB utilization efﬁciency is
evaluated in terms of percentage of the actual payload and
the padded zeros with respect to MCS index. It can be seen
from Fig. 3 that with the lower MCS values depicting
unfavorable channel conditions, the PRB capacity is
smaller, and therefore, it is fully utilized to transmit the
given payload. On the other hand, with the higher MCS
3

Physical Resource Block.

In the proposed data multiplexing scheme, the small-sized
M2M data packets are multiplexed at the Packet Data
Convergence Protocol (PDCP) layer of the RN. A highlevel illustration of E-UTRAN (Evolved UMTS Terrestrial
Radio Access Network) architecture with the functionalities of LTE-Advanced relaying is depicted in Fig. 4. The
RN communicates with devices using access link (Uu),
whereas it communicates with DeNB using backhaul link
(Un). Thus, it behaves like an eNB toward the M2M
devices, whereas it acts as a UE toward the DeNB.
The RN PDCP is selected to aggregate M2M packets in
order to maximize the multiplexing gain. This increasing
multiplexing gain is achieved without aggregating the
additional overheads such as those from the PDCP, Radio
Link Control (RLC), and Medium Access Control (MAC).
A high-level illustration of the proposed scheme is given in
Fig. 5. Generally, the PDCP layer is a part of LTE air
interface control and user plane protocols. It exists in the
UE, Donor eNB (DeNB), and in the RN. The major
functionalities of PDCP layer for the user plane include
header compression and decompression, user data transfer,
delivery of upper layer Packet Data Units (PDUs) in
sequence, and retransmission of PDCP Service Data Units
(SDUs). Moreover, the control plane services include
ciphering and integrity protection and transfer of control
plane data. The proposed multiplexing scheme can also be
applied at the lower layers of the RN such as RLC and
MAC on the Uu interface or in the PDCP of Un interface.
However, in these cases, the multiplexing gain will be
reduced due to the multiplexing of additional headers along
with the original small-sized data packets [13].
A multiplexing buffer is created at the RN PDCP layer
which multiplexes the incoming packets according to the
available service rate which is equal to Transport Block
Size (TBS)—RN Un protocol overheads in terms of bits
per TTI, as shown in Fig. 5. The Un protocol overhead
includes 12, 28, and 4 bytes for GTP (GPRS Tunneling
Protocol), UDP (User Datagram Protocol)/IP, and layer 2,
respectively. The multiplexed packet is sent to the RN GTP
over the Un link. The additional overheads such as from


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:15

ApplicaƟon
server

Serving
gateway
(S-GW)

Overcoming
shadowing problems

(DeNB) (RN)

Un

Uu

Un

(M2M)

Uu

Un

Uu

Hotspot coverage for ITS and
logisƟcal operaƟons

Coverage extensions
Fig. 4 An illustration of LTE-Advanced relaying technology. Re-drawn based on [26])

ApplicaƟon
TCP/UDP

GTP

UDP

IP

IP

PDCP

PDCP

PDCP

RLC

RLC

IP

RLC

GTP

UDP

λN

λ1 λ2 λ 3
PDCP
RLC

UDP

IP

IP

GTP

UDP

MUX

GTP

RLC

IP

Layer 2
MAC

MAC

MAC

MAC

MAC

PHY

PHY

PHY

PHY

PHY

M2M device

RN

DeNB

PHY

aGW

Fig. 5 A high-level illustration of the proposed multiplexing scheme along with protocols stack of the M2M device, RN, and DeNB

the GTP, UDP/IP, PDCP, and RLC are added. The block
diagram of the data differentiating algorithm at the DeNB
is given in Fig. 6. From the physical layer of the RN, the
multiplexed packets are sent to the DeNB over the Un
interface, as depicted in Fig. 5.
The multiplexing approach signiﬁcantly improves PRB
utilization. However, there are certain constraints regarding
latency requirements of high priority M2M trafﬁc such as
accidental information, emergency alerting, and e-health.
This is due to the fact that each packet waits until the size
of the buffer B is equal to the available TBS—RN Un
protocol overheads. In a highly loaded scenario, the waiting time is not long due to a high arrival rate. However, in a

123

low loaded scenario, there is a comparatively longer delay
due to the low arrival rate. Consequently, the performance
of delay sensitive M2M applications can be degraded. To
tackle this issue, an expiry timer, Tmax is introduced. The
timer is set with a ﬁxed value such as 10 ms in the current
implementation. This means that the buffer serves the
multiplexed packet after 10 ms at the latest. The value of
the timer could also be adaptive, i.e., it can change its value
according to priorities of the incoming packets. For this
purpose, the algorithm must be fully aware of various
priorities of M2M applications.
In this work, a ﬁxed RN is implemented and used to

15

Start
Router

Packet arrival at the PDCP layer
of the DeNB

DeNB

Remote
server

Backhaul link

Access
gateway

Access link
RN

Identify the destination IP of the
received packet

If
(incoming packet IP ==
DeNB IP)

X2

False The received packet belongs
to the standalone user
n
M2M devices

True

Send the packet to GTP-U

The received packet belongs
to the RN

Send to GTP-U via IP and
UDP

Fig. 7 Project editor of the LTE-Advanced-based model developed
in the RIVERBED Modeler simulator

•
•

The overall service rate is l ¼ lPRB Â 5ðPRBsÞ b/s.
So, the system utilization q can be given as
Utilization;

Tunnel each packet again
and route towards aGW

•

q¼

Arrival rate k
¼
Service rate l

ð1Þ

Utilization;

De-tunnel to extract the
original transmitted
standalone packets

q¼

N Â 656
321600

ð2Þ

Moreover, the maximum number of devices served can
be given as follows,
Nmax ¼

end

q Â 321600
656

ð3Þ

Fig. 6 Block diagram of the data differentiating algorithm at the
DeNB

5 Simulation model and parameters
in ITS and logistics (i.e., for onboard security and
metering purposes). The position of the RN corresponds
to an MCS of 16, whereas 5 PRBs are allocated to RN to
serve M2M trafﬁc. The given values of MCS and PRBs
correspond to TB size of 1608 bits per TTI. Since a TTI
is of 1-ms duration, the TB size can also be given as
1608000 bits/s. According to the 3GPP standardizations,
the capacity of a single PRB varies according to the
MCS. Therefore, under the given values of MCS and
PRBs, 321 bits per TTI or 321000 bits/s can be sent
within a single PRB. In general, the system utilization, q
can be determined in terms of the arrival rate, k and the
service rate, l. Additionally, the maximum number of
served devices, Nmax can be determined according to the
following procedure,
•
•
•

The size of the each transmitted M2M packet per
second is Psize ¼ 656 bits.
The arrival rate k due to N number of devices is
ðN Â 656Þb=s.
The service rate per PRB is lPRB ¼ 321000 b/s.

The Optimized Network Engineering Tool (OPNET)
Modeler which is newly named as RIVERBED Modeler is
used as a primary modeling, simulation, and analysis tool
for this research. It provides a simulation environment for
the performance measurements of communication networks [32]. The project editor of the LTE-Advanced-based
model developed in the simulator with several nodes along
with LTE-Advanced functionalities and protocols is shown
in Fig. 7. Additionally, an RN is implemented and placed
within the coverage of DeNB to relay and multiplex M2M
data trafﬁc. The DeNB is responsible to connect UEs/M2M
devices with the transport network, thus includes both radio
interface and transport protocols to communicate with
UEs/M2M devices and the core network, respectively. The
radio protocols trafﬁc coming from aGW toward the RN.
The remote server and the aGW (access gateway) are
interconnected with an Ethernet link with an average delay
of 20 ms. Moreover, aGW acts as the tunneling point for
the downlink and uplink trafﬁc coming from PDN-GW and
DeNB, respectively. The aGW node protocols include the


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:15

Table 2 Simulation parameters
Parameters

Values

Simulation length

1000 s

eNB coverage radius

350 m

Min. eNB UE distance

35 m

Max terminal power

work. Later, we discuss our simulation results in detail with
varying load conditions. In this work, we consider M2M
devices used in ITS and logistics in order to generate
uplink trafﬁc.

23 dBm

Terminal speed

120 km/h

Mobility model

Random way point (RWP)

Frequency reuse factor

1

Transmission bandwidth

5 MHz

No. of PRBs

25

MCS

QPSK, 16QAM, 64QAM,

Channel models
Path loss

Pathloss, slow fading, fast fading
128:1 þ 37:6 log10 ðRÞ, R in km

Slow fading

Log-normal shadowing, correlation
1, deviation 8 dB

Fast fading

Jakes-like method [33]

RN parameters
PRBs for RN

5

Corresponding MCS

16

TBS

1608 bits

Simulated scenarios

No multiplexing, multiplexing
without timer, and multiplexing
with timer

Timer expiry values

10 ms (Sect. 6.2)

Timer expiry values

5, 10 and 20 ms (Sect. 6.3)

Type of RN

Fixed

M2M Trafﬁc model [34]
Message size

1 s (constant)

The scenarios are simulated according to three major categories, i.e., no multiplexing, multiplexing without timer,
and multiplexing with timer. In the ﬁrst category, M2M
data packets are relayed in uplink without multiplexing. In
the second category, the data packets from all the active
devices are multiplexed at the RN before being sent to the
DeNB. However, in this category, no expiry timer is considered to control the multiplexing process, and the multiplexed packet is served when its size is large enough to
utilize full capacity of the available spectrum. In the third
category, an expiry timer is introduced in order to limit the
multiplexing delay especially in the low loaded scenarios.
In this case, the multiplexed packet is served after Tmax at
the latest. Each category is further divided into several
scenarios. The scenarios are simulated for both load conditions (i.e., low and high). In the low loads, the number of
devices, N, is kept 200 in the ﬁrst scenario. The value of
N is incremented by 200 in the subsequent scenarios till the
limiting case, i.e., when all 5 PRBs are fully utilized. In
high loads, 28004 devices are placed in the ﬁrst scenario,
and the number is also incremented by 200 in the subsequent scenarios.

38 bytes (constant) at the device PDCP

Inter-send time

6.1 Simulation scenarios description

Internet Protocol (IP) and Ethernet. The aGW and DeNB
nodes (names as eNB1..) communicate through IP routers
(R1..). QoS parameters at the Transport Network (TN)
ensure QoS parameterization and trafﬁc differentiation.
The user movement in a cell is emulated by the mobility
model by periodically updating the location of the user.
The user mobility information is stored in the global user
database (Global-UE-List). The channel model parameters
for the air interface include path loss, slow fading, and fast
fading models. In this paper, the simulation modeling
mainly focuses on the user plane to perform E2E performance evaluations. Furthermore, Table 2 presents a
detailed description of simulation parameters and settings.

6.2 Simulation results
The simulation results for the mean number of used PRBs
with 95 % conﬁdence interval (CI) are illustrated in Figs. 8
and 9 for the low and high load conditions, respectively.
The values of the upper and lower bound of CI are very
small in most of the scenarios as shown in Figs. 8 and 9.
These PRBs are used by RN to transmit the multiplexed
data toward the DeNB.
The simulation results clearly show the efﬁcient utilization of PRBs in uplink with the proposed multiplexing
scheme. For instance, in the no multiplexing scenario with
400 devices, the arrival rate at the PHY layer of the RN is
262.4 bit/TTI which almost utilize 1 PRB. However, in the
case of multiplexing, only half of the PRBs are used to
serve the 400 devices, see Fig. 8. Similarly, without multiplexing, the RN serves nearly 2400 devices with 5 PRBs
in uplink, which is actually the limiting case as shown in

6 Results and discussion
4

This section investigates the performance of the proposed
multiplexing scheme in the low and high loaded scenarios.
We ﬁrstly describe all scenarios which are simulated in this

123

5 PRBs are allocated to RN in order to serve M2M devices. These
PRBs are fully utilized when the number of devices is raised to 2600
without multiplexing. So the high load scenarios start with 2800

Mean PRBs used

4.00

15

0.03

No mulƟplexing

No mulƟplexing

MulƟplexing without Ɵmer

Mean E2E delay [s]

5.00

Page 9 of 11

MulƟplexing with Ɵmer

3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50

MulƟplexing without Ɵmer
0.02

MulƟplexing with Ɵmer

0.01

1.00
0.50

0.00
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600

0.00

M2M devices

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600

M2M devices

Fig. 8 A comparison of mean PRBs used with and without data
multiplexing in low loaded scenarios. Tmax ¼ 10 ms

Fig. 10 A comparison of packet mean E2E delay in low loaded
scenarios. Tmax ¼ 10 ms

0.03

4.50

Mean PRBs used

4.00
3.50
3.00

No mulƟplexing

2.50

MulƟplexing without Ɵmer

2.00

Mean E2E delay [s]

5.00

No mulƟplexing
MulƟplexing without Ɵmer
MulƟplexing with Ɵmer

0.02

0.01

MulƟplexing with Ɵmer

1.50
0.00

1.00

2800

0.50

3000

3200

3400

3600

3800

4000

4200

4400

M2M devices

0.00
2800

3000

3200

3400

3600

3800

4000

4200

4400

M2M devices

Fig. 9 Comparing simulation results of mean PRBs used with and
without data trafﬁc multiplexing in high loaded scenarios.
Tmax ¼ 10 ms

Fig. 8. However, in case of multiplexing, the number of
devices served by the RN nearly doubles, i.e., approximately 4200 devices are served as depicted in Fig. 9. This
is due to the fact that in the case of no multiplexing, each
data packet contains an additional Un air interface overhead of GTP, UDP, IP, and layer 2. The additional overhead causes an extra PRB usage and overall reduces the
PRB utilization efﬁciency. Moreover, in low loaded scenarios such as with 200 devices (see Fig. 8), the average
number of PRBs used is slightly higher in the case of
multiplexing with timer. This is due to the fact that the RN
serves the trafﬁc at the latest after 10 ms, and thus, the PRB
is not necessarily used with its maximum capacity due to
the low arrival rate. However, in high load scenarios, the
timer has almost no impact, and a nearly equal number of
PRBs is used with and without timer.
Figures 10 and 11 show the simulation results of the
mean packet E2E delay in low and high load scenarios,
respectively. The results show that the value of packet E2E

Fig. 11 Comparing packet mean E2E delay in high loaded scenarios
with timer expiry, Tmax ¼ 10 ms

delay is higher in the case of multiplexing for low loads as
shown in Fig. 10. This increase in delay time is due to less
arriving packets especially in the low loaded scenarios. The
buffer aggregates packets until its size plus the additional
Un overhead is equal to the available TBS. However, the
use of an expiry timer limits the delay by serving the
aggregated packets at the latest after 10 ms. On the other
hand, in high loaded scenarios, the E2E delay is slightly
higher compared to the case of no multiplexing, see
Fig. 11. This is due to high arrival rate and the buffer
aggregates the incoming packets to make a large aggregated packet within less time. Moreover, the value of the
E2E delay is very large in fully loaded scenarios as
depicted in Fig. 10, when the RN utilizes all 5 PRBs with
the maximum capacity.
6.3 Impact of timer expiry on data multiplexing
In this section, we investigate the impact of timer expiry,
Tmax on mean PRB utilization and E2E delay by varying
input trafﬁc. However, we only consider low loaded scenarios due to the fact that the timer expiry has almost no

1.40

Tmax = 05 ms
Tmax = 10 ms
Tmax = 15 ms

1.20

Mean PRBs used

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:15

1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

M2M devices

Fig. 12 A comparison of packets mean E2E delay

0.010

Tmax = 05 ms

Mean E2E delay [s]

0.009

Tmax = 10 ms

0.008

Tmax = 15 ms

0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001

average, as it allows more packets to be multiplexed before
timer expiry. Resultantly, it increases the multiplexing
gain. Additionally, it is further noted that larger values of
Tmax has almost no affect on PRBs used in the case of high
loads. For instance, when N ¼ 1000, the average values of
PRBs used are 1.219 and 1.213 for the maximum waiting
time of 10 and 15 ms, respectively.
Similarly, Fig. 13 compares the simulation results of the
mean E2E delay for the given timer expiry values. As
discussed in the beginning, the larger values of waiting
time, Tmax , increase the mean packet E2E delay, particularly in the low loaded scenarios. However, the effect
reduces with the larger values of N . For instance, in the
low loaded scenario when N ¼ 100, the given values of
maximum waiting time introduce a mean E2E delay of
0.0045, 0.0070, and 0.0095 ms, respectively. Since the
effect of timer on the multiplexing process decreases due to
the increasing arrival rate, the mean E2E delay values are
reduced to 0.00368, 0.00416, and 0.00419, respectively, for
N ¼ 1000. Furthermore, it is noted that the values of mean
E2E delay for Tmax of 10 and 15 ms are almost similar.
Moreover, the impact of timer expiry completely vanishes
when input trafﬁc load is increased beyond 1000, as discussed earlier in Figs. 10 and 11.

0.000
100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

M2M devices

Fig. 13 A comparison of packets mean E2E delay

affect on PRB utilization and mean E2E delay in high
loaded scenarios in the multiplexing process, as discussed
earlier in Figs. 10 and 11. In general, the mean value of
used PRBs decreases and E2E delay increases for larger
values of the timer expiry. Additionally, this trade-off is
heavily dependent on the arrival rate, as discussed earlier.
In this work, 10 scenarios are simulated in order to
evaluate the impact of timer expiry on the multiplexing
process. In the ﬁrst scenario, 100 M2M devices are considered to generate input trafﬁc. The number of devices is
incremented by 100 in the subsequent scenarios. The above
scenarios are simulated for the timer expiry values of 5, 10,
and 15 ms. The simulation results of mean number of used
PRBs and E2E delay are compared for the given values of
maximum waiting time. Figures 12 and 13 compare the
simulation results of mean PRB utilization and E2E delay,
respectively. Figure 12 shows that less PRBs are used in
the case of larger values of Tmax , when the arrival rate is
kept constant. For instance, in the ﬁrst scenario with
N ¼ 100, average numbers of PRBs used are 0.48, 0.27,
and 0.20 for the timer expiry values of 5, 10, and 15 ms,
respectively. It shows that for the larger values of maximum waiting time, less number of PRBs is used on

123

7 Conclusion
The latest 3GPP LTE-Advanced networks have primarily
focused on dominating non-cellular technologies to support
M2M applications also in the future. Since automotive
applications and logistical processes demand wide coverages, increased data rates, high reliability, and low costs,
LTE-Advanced is considered as the ready-to-use technology to fulﬁll the future M2M service requirements. Nevertheless, the major challenge is to support the myriad of
devices sending small-sized data and thus inefﬁciently
utilizing radio resources (PRBs). Since the spectrum for
mobile networks will remain a scarce resource, new concepts for new trafﬁc type demand careful planning and
evaluation. In this paper, the data multiplexing scheme is
proposed to overcome the risk of inefﬁcient PRB utilization for mobile M2M trafﬁc. Our results show that
approximately 40 % more M2M devices in ITS and
logistics are served under the present system settings as
compared to the state of the art without the use of multiplexing approach. Additionally, the QoS provisioning of
the M2M trafﬁc is ensured by considering an expiry timer
which minimizes the multiplexing delays especially in low
loaded scenarios. More importantly, approximately 60 %
of PRB utilization is improved for a maximum timer expiry
value of 15 ms especially in low loaded scenarios. Thus,
very useful scheme for network operators as well as service
providers.
