
Background and related works
A reverse logistics network is formed by four main activities: gatekeeping, collection,
sorting, and recovery (disposal) [16]. These are shown in Figure 2.
Many recent works propose models and methods for the design of a reverse logistics
network. These mainly propose the use of mathematical programming, and more precisely mixed-integer linear programming models are used [17]. According to the recent
literature review in [17], the only objectives considered in reverse logistics or forward/
reverse network design are cost, profit, responsiveness (service level), source balance,


Figure 2 Reverse logistics network main activities.

and quality. The most considered decision criterion is the total cost of the network
[18-22], followed by the service level [23]. Zhou and Wang [24] propose a generic
model for reverse logistics design considering only costs as decision criteria. Lee and
Dong [25] propose a two-stage stochastic programming model for multi-period reverse
logistics network design with the different investment and operational costs as the main
decision criterion. Lambert et al. [26] consider the environmental regulations as a constraint to their decision model but not as decision criteria. Cardoso et al. [27] proposed
a mixed-integer linear programming model for supply chain planning including reverse
logistics activities. Yet they consider the expected net present value (ENPV) as the decision criterion. In this case study and research work, the environmental impact of the
network is an important design factor; therefore, it should be considered as a main decision criterion in the design of reverse logistics network. This means considering not
only the environmental impact of transportation activities, but also the remanufacturing and recycling activities.
The main decisions of the proposed models in the literature are location/allocation of
facilities and transportation values [18-23]. Most of these models consider the network
design problem with collection, sorting, and recovery (disposal) facilities owned by one
company which is collecting the reverse flow and reusing it. This is not always the case.
Reverse logistics networks include not only facilities owned by the company itself, but
also facilities owned by other partners in the network. This means that designing the
best reverse logistics network includes three main decisions: 1) making/buying, 2) supplier selection, and 3) location/allocation of facilities.
These three decisions should be made while taking into consideration the environmental performance of the reverse logistics network. This means integrating environmental indicators as decision criteria.
Few works considered the recycling option of the recovery step [20,28]. Most works
found in the literature consider the remanufacturing option [18,19,21-23]. In this case
study, the interest is in using recycled aluminum. Thus, the main considered recovery
activity is recycling. This means that the reverse flow will probably have different
sources, which might not all have the same recovery route (related recycling activities).

A framework for the design of reverse logistics
Network design method

Since the main aim of this project is to be more sustainable and more precisely to have

the performance of the chosen network. It permits assessing the environmental performance of the reverse logistics network alone and also its impact on the whole life
cycle assessment of the product. This permits integrating the environmental performance of the network as a decision criterion for its design. The proposed method is
formed by five main steps presented in Figure 3.
Step 1: Context definition

In this step, the company and the product(s) are described. The constraints of the company are listed as well as its preference for outsourcing/insourcing reverse logisticsrelated activities.
Step 2: Parameter definition

The parameter definition, as shown in Figure 4, consists of identifying the different
roles in a reverse logistics network, the responsibilities and activities per role, the requirements for these activities, and the performance indicators per requirement per activity. Four roles were identified:
1. The collector: responsible for the gatekeeping and collection activities
2. The sorter: responsible for sorting activities
3. The recoverer: responsible for recovery activities (recycling, remanufacturing,
landfill, etc.)
4. The end collector of reverse flow: the user of the final recovered reverse flow.
The same partner may have more than one role, and different partners might have
the same role. For example, the end collector of a reverse flow might also collect the


Figure 4 Parameter definition step.

returns, and a sorter might also recycle or remanufacture the reverse flow. One partner
may have all roles. In this case, the same company owns the entire reverse network.
The requirements per activity are case dependent. Most of them depend on the type
of the product. The recycling processes for example differ based on the product type,
whereas the general performance indicators are the same no matter the product type.
Concerning the performance indicators, these are:
 Total cost of the network including cost of transportation, facilities, purchasing,

activities, and stock: This is the most used reverse logistics performance indicator
in the literature (see the ‘Background and related works’ section).
 Recycling rate: This indicator reflects the service level of the entire network. It
reflects the percentage of recycled material for the product using the recovered
reverse flow.
 Life cycle assessment-related indicators: These indicators permit evaluating the
environmental impact of the reverse logistics network. Considering the environmental
performance of the reverse logistics network is the main goal of this work. The most
used life cycle assessment (LCA) indicators are climate change (or carbon footprint of
product), energy-related indicators, chemicals used, PFC/GHG emissions, fresh water
consumption, and use of renewable/nonrenewable energy.
The above presented indicators are decision criteria for the design of the reverse logistics network. Other indicators are needed for the supplier selection decision. According to [29], the most used criteria for the supplier selection decision are price,
deliver on time, quality, equipment and capability, geographic location, technical capability, and finally management and organization. To these criteria, the environmentrelated indicator is added: the green processes. This indicator reflects whether the
processes used are environmentally friendly or not. This indicator is of outmost importance for the sorting and recycling activities where the environmental impact depends
on the technology used.
In this step, candidate companies for playing one or more roles in the reverse logistics network are also defined. For each company, a description sheet is filled containing
information on the company, performance indicators, and constraints, such as the

Step 3: Scenario definition

The scenario definition is achieved by the expert user in one of two ways:
1. Defining any reverse logistics network scenario, by choosing for each role one or
more companies as well as the quantity of reverse flow and then by choosing the
routes between these companies.
2. Defining the reverse logistics network step by step, using decision criteria per role.
In this case, and for every role, the user may ask to identify the best company based
on many decision criteria, identified in step 2. This option is based on the analytical
hierarchy process (AHP). AHP is the most used decision support system for
supplier selection [30]. This technique which was developed by Thomas L. Saaty
[31] relies on the expertise of the user in order to generate the weights of attributes.
It is based on the comparison of pairs of options and criteria. It has found widespread
application in decision-making problems, involving multiple criteria in systems of
many levels [32]. Its main advantages are:
 Consideration of non-tangible subjective attributes
 Ability to structure a complex multi-criteria, multi-person, and multi-period
hierarchical problem
 Capability to investigate each level of the hierarchy separately and to combine
the results as the analysis progresses
 Binary comparison of elements (alternatives, criteria, and sub-criteria)
 Availability of IT support.
The steps that need to be followed in this option are:
1. Fill for every potential partner the measured performance for all decision criteria
identified previously.
2. Fill the criteria comparison matrix for all criteria identified in the ‘Background and
related works’ section.
3. Choose a specific role of the reverse logistics network. The design may be
made in a forward or backward manner. This means the allocation of partner
per role may be realized by starting at the end of the network or at its
beginning.
4. Choose a specific type of reverse flow.
5. Identify all candidates (company/facility/supplier) for the chosen role.
6. Select the decision (selection) criteria of interest (from the pool of all available
criteria).
7. Calculate the weights, using AHP.
8. Rank all candidates, using AHP.
9. Select the candidate ranked first.
10.Allocate order quantities, choose transportation mode, and validate.
The user may choose many scenarios as desired and compare their performance in
steps 4 and 5. In other words, the user may compare on the basis of all environmental
and economic criteria the scenarios built with the decision aid option and with any

Steps 4 and 5: Assessment of reverse logistics scenarios and result analysis

After one or more scenarios are chosen, the different performance indicators are calculated. A comparison between the scenarios is provided.
The evaluation of the reverse logistics network is achieved via life cycle assessment
software (SimaPro) [33]. This is possible within the SuPLight project which aims at
providing a collaborative platform [34] allowing the communication and exchange of
information between different softwares such as the LCA software and the reverse logistics demonstrator.
After the life cycle assessment of the different reverse logistics scenarios is received
from the LCA software, a full analysis combing this assessment and the one achieved
via the reverse logistics prototype (total cost of the network, quantity of recycled material, etc.) is provided to the user. A comparison of all created reverse logistics scenarios
is then delivered to the user.
The AHP method is reused at this stage to identify the best-fitting reverse logistics
network.
Reverse logistics prototype (demonstrator)

The proposed method was the basis of the development of the software prototype. It
has been designed with a flexible architecture in order to allow portability and interoperability with any external application. The software prototype implementation is
based on the MVC software architecture pattern, using HTML5 and CSS to create the
view and for the application logic the JAX-RS Java API for RESTful web services which
are controlled by JavaScript (JQuery).
The reverse logistics prototype is focused on reverse logistics scenario definition
allowing the user to choose the partners of the reverse logistics network and their roles
and visualize them on a map; define reverse logistics routes - a single route is characterized by flow and transportation data (the flow type and the quantity exchanged between two partners, transportation mean and distance); visualize the summary of the
created scenario and the final route on the map; display LCA indicators for the current
scenario; compare several scenarios on a radar graph based on the indicator value and
the total RL cost; use the decision aid system to choose partners based on input criteria; determine recommended quantities for each route; and compute RL indicators
for each scenario (total cost of the network, quantity of recycled material, etc.). Google
services are used for automatic distance calculation and map display based on data provided by the user. The prototype main page and the route definition interface are presented in Figures 5 and 6, respectively. On the main page, the prototype shows the
reverse logistics scenario on a map with a description of the different routes including
the node names (companies' names) with the type of reverse flow, quantity of flow,
transportation mode, and distance between the two nodes. The different enterprises or
facilities chosen for the reverse logistics network are presented on the map. This map
is dynamic and shows the chosen facility locations or the chosen suppliers as well as all
related costs. This map serves only as a visualization tool for the chosen scenario.
This prototype is not intended for advanced planning of a supply chain such as the
advanced planning and scheduling (APS) software. But its main function is to provide a
support for decision making in designing a reverse logistics network. Even though the

Figure 5 Reverse logistics demonstrator main page.

such as AHP nor does it provide the optimal reverse logistics network among all possible scenarios; it permits only to compare between manually created scenarios. The
use of the proposed demonstrator does not eliminate the need to use the APS software
which is necessary to manage a reverse logistics network. The demonstrator may be
considered as a plug-in for the APS software.

Application of the proposed framework to an industrial case study
Step 1: Context definition

The case study concerns a front lower control arm of GM Opel Insignia. This component was chosen by Raufoss Technology (RT) as a case study. RT is the end collector
of reverse flow in this case study. RT wishes to only have the role of the end collector
of reverse flow. This means all other reverse logistics activities are outsourced.



The control arm which is an important part of a vehicle's suspension system consists
of a bar used to attach the suspension members to the vehicle's chassis. It is produced
from a high-strength wrought aluminum alloy: AA6082. The control arm is produced
by hot forging and machining from extruded aluminum billets. Heat treatment is necessary to obtain the necessary strength.
Step 2: Defining reverse logistics parameters
Defining the gatekeeping activity

The acceptable characteristics and chemical compositions are defined as well as possible
returns (specific products/alloys) and their sources. These are presented in Table 1.
Defining the collection activity

Possible collection locations were identified (Table 1). At first, the type of these collection
locations was defined. Then, specific enterprises of the identified types were determined.
Defining the sorting and the recovery/treatment activities

The aluminum recycling industry includes a wide range of processes, which require a
wide range of control techniques. These different processes have different environmental performance and produce different qualities of reverse flow. Moreover, they are not
all suited for all types of returns containing aluminum. The only recovery option considered in this case study is recycling for acceptable returns. Thus, the sorting activity
consists of selecting acceptable returns, shredding it, and separating aluminum alloys
Table 1 Acceptable returns and their sources
Products/alloys

Product/source

Possible collection locations

Bumper

Vehicle (dismantling)

Car scrap yard, automotive dismantlers,
and recyclers

Wheels

Vehicle (dismantling)

Car scrap yard, automotive dismantlers,
and recyclers

Suspension, chassis, etc.

Vehicle (dismantling)

Car scrap yard, automotive dismantlers,
and recyclers

Closures, skin sheet,
and inner stiffness

Vehicle (dismantling)

Car scrap yard, automotive dismantlers,
and recyclers

Body structure

Vehicle (dismantling)

Car scrap yard, automotive dismantlers,
and recyclers

Seats

Vehicle (dismantling)

Car scrap yard, automotive dismantlers,
and recyclers

AA3003

Vehicle (shredding, alloy separation)

Shredding plant

AA5754

Vehicle (shredding, alloy separation)

Shredding plant

AA6016

Vehicle (shredding, alloy separation)

Shredding plant

AA6060

Vehicle (shredding, alloy separation)

Shredding plant

Wrought 1

Vehicle (shredding, alloy separation)

Shredding plant

Wrought 2

Vehicle (shredding, alloy separation)

Shredding plant

Siding

Building (demolition)

Demolition contractors

Window frames

Building (demolition)

Demolition contractors

3004 corrugating roofing

Building (demolition)

Demolition contractors

Foils

Packaging (sorting)

European recycling centers and companies

Rigid containers

Packaging (sorting)

European recycling centers and companies

Closures


Figure 7 Scenario 1.

from other materials including other metals. This step will output the necessary scrap
that will be used in the recycling activity. In summary, the sorting and recovery activities are the following:
1. Shredding
2. Sorting: electromagnetic separation, eddy-current separation, sink-float, and color
sorting/etching
3. Refining: distillation, electrolytic separation, hot crush, unidirectional solidification,
and flux separation
4. Remelting
5. Casting aluminum
6. Extrusion.


Figure 9 Scenario 2.

Identifying potential partners

Potential partners were identified for the three roles: collector, sorter, and recoverer.
These and the related collected data are not shown in this article due to confidentiality
issues. In total, 20 potential partners were identified.
Step 3: Defining different reverse logistics scenarios

Using the reverse logistics plug-in, two main RL scenarios were identified. These are
presented in Figures 7, 8, 9, and 10. In the figures, a coefficient is indicated for every
selected partner. This is equal to the coefficient of output/input. It represents the percentage of the covered input at the end of the activity achieved at this partner. The collector coefficient corresponds to the average percentage of Al in a car. The coefficient
of sorting and recycling activities is recovered from AL recycling literature. The


Page 12 of 15

Table 2 Results for the reverse logistics scenarios considering environmental performance
for EOL
Indicator

Unit

Plug-in

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

Nonrenewable energy (resources)

MJ

LCA

57.2

72.46

Climate change

kg CO2 · eq.

LCA

7.74

8.66

3

Fresh water consumption (water withdrawal)

m

LCA

0.058

0.065

Recycling rate

%

RL

40

60

Total reverse logistics cost

Euros

RL

3,848,108.92

5,673,167.78

recommended quantity calculated via the plug-in takes into consideration this coefficient. The choice of a partner is made based on different criteria such as the geographical location, the transportation mean, the transportation cost, the quality of the reverse
flow, the price of the reverse flow, the order delay, the partner reputation, the partner
flexibility, and green processes used. The final criterion is very important since the aim
of the designed reverse logistics is to reduce environmental impacts.
Step 4: Assessment of the different reverse logistics scenarios

Using the reverse logistics plug-in and via its communication with the SuPLight platform, the performance of the designed RL networks is calculated. Considering environmental performance, the user may choose to view the environmental impact of the
designed reverse logistics network, either for the end-of-life (EOL) phase or for the
whole life cycle. The results presented in Table 2 show the performance of reverse logistics
scenarios considering only the EOL phase. Figure 11 compares the environmental impact
of reverse logistics scenarios to the baseline scenario which is the current state with 0%
recycled aluminum.
Step 5: Analysis of the assessment results and definition of the best reverse logistics scenario

Using the reverse logistics plug-in, scenarios may be compared on a radar graph; the



Table 3 AHP scores for the two reverse logistics scenarios, considering EOL environmental
performance
AHP score

Nonrenewable
energy

Climate change

Fresh water
consumption

Recycling rate

Total RL cost

Final
score

Weight Score Weight

Score

Weight Score Weight Score Weight Score

Scenario 1

0.316

0.833

0.286

0.750

0.185

0.750

0.094

0.167

0.119

0.875

0.736

Scenario 2

0.316

0.167

0.286

0.250

0.185

0.250

0.094

0.833

0.119

0.125

0.264

calculating a final score for every scenario in order to identify the best-fitting scenario
for Raufoss. These scores are presented in Tables 3 and 4 for EOL and the whole life
cycle, respectively.

Results and discussions
The obtained results in Figure 11 show a significant difference (of more than 20%) between the baseline and scenarios 1 and 2 for climate change, resource consumption,
and water withdrawal. This means that introducing recycled scrap is beneficial in terms
of environmental impact reduction. Aluminum old scrap recycling is considered as less
polluting than extracting virgin aluminum. This general point of view has been proved
in this case study.
It is important to consider environmental impact of a reverse logistics network for its
design. If only reverse logistics cost was considered as the decision criterion, scenario 1
would have been the best scenario. Nevertheless, considering environmental impact
shows that scenario 2 is more beneficial. Scenario 2 has better environmental impact
for the whole life cycle of the FLCA.
According to the results obtained and shown in Table 4, scenario 2 has a higher score
and thus is the best-fitting scenario for the FLCA. This is in contradiction with the results obtained comparing only the environmental performance of the two scenarios for
the EOL phase. Considering only the EOL environmental impact, scenario 1 received a
final score of 0.736, while scenario 2 received a score of 0.264. Considering these results, scenario 1 is by far the best scenario and should thus be chosen for the reverse
logistics network. Nevertheless, when considering the environmental impact for the entire life cycle, scenario 1 received a final score of 0.301, while scenario 2 received a final
score of 0.699. Scenario 2 is in this case the best scenario and should be chosen. The
total cost of the reverse logistics network and the recycling rate do not change. But the
environmental performance changes when considering either one phase or the entire
life cycle. This proves that the impact of the reverse logistics network on the whole life
cycle of the product should be considered and not only for the EOL phase. In other
words, the design of the reverse logistics network should take into consideration the
forward supply chain in order to ensure a better performance for the entire chain (forward and reverse supply chain).
Table 4 AHP scores for the two reverse logistics scenarios, considering environmental
performance for whole life cycle
AHP score

Nonrenewable
energy

Climate change

Fresh water
consumption

Recycling rate

Total RL cost

Final
score

Weight Score Weight

Score

Weight Score Weight Score Weight Score

Scenario 1

0.316

0.250

0.286

0.250

0.185

0.167

0.094

0.167

0.119

0.875

0.301

Scenario 2

0.316

0.750

0.286

0.750

0.185

0.833

0.094

0.833

0.119


Conclusion and perspectives
In this paper, a method for designing a reverse logistics network was presented. It was
the basis for the design of a reverse logistics and development of a plug-in. Both were
used to design the reverse logistics network for the left front control arm for Raufoss
Technology within the European project, SuPLight. The case study validated the
method as well as the plug-in developed. They are both designed based on industrial
needs. The AHP method was used to compare different reverse logistics scenarios. The
aim of the proposed method is to design a reverse logistics network while taking into
consideration all possible recovery activities, the possibility of having other partners in
the network, and its environmental impact. The results obtained validate the necessity
to consider other criteria than cost when designing a reverse logistics network. The results also show the necessity of considering the environmental impact of the reverse logistics network for the whole product life cycle.
The developed method and plug-in are based on human intervention and thus cannot be fully automated. Future works will focus on integrating a closed-loop supply
chain approach which might offer several advantages in terms of improving the performance of the whole network and not only the RL network [35].
