Introduction
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), also known as the 2030 Agenda, came into effect
on 1 January 2016. With these goals, the United Nations set forth a formidable task for the global
community following the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The SDGs consist of 17 goals
and 169 associated targets that provide an opportunity to integrate development goals, and focus on
the sustainable development of not only least-developed countries (LDCs), but all countries around
the world (UN Sustainable Development Goals 2015). The MDGs took step towards multi-tiered
development and poverty eradication, but they ignored problems of limited local capacities and
poor data management. The adoption of the SDGs is evidence of global commitment to sustainable
development post-2015 and is a platform on which to take action. Two years have passed since the
kickoff of Agenda 2030 and the attention is now shifting from policy towards implementation. The shift
raises concern on how the goals will be implemented and at the same time avoiding some of the major
problems observed with the MDGs.
To be a sustained endeavor beyond 2030, the SDGs need a concerted and coordinated effort to
move from internationally driven development projects to locally and regionally driven operations.
To achieve this, a broader and deeper understanding of the linkage between localization and data
disaggregation should be elucidated to avoid the pitfalls of the MDGs. Moreover, greater insight of this
connection will translate into local and regional policy interventions grounded in empirical evidence.

Recognizing the MDG implementation impediments and the foci for SDG implementation, many
questions surrounding localization and data disaggregation are still not answered: How can these
paradigms overcome the issues of the MDGs and achieve the SDGs? What are the costs and benefits
for local and regional governments (LRGs)? Who will provide the necessary guidance and how much
will it cost? Research conducted in this paper aims to explain localization and data disaggregation in
the context of the SDGs, the impact on key performance indicators (KPIs), how to disaggregate data to
influence policy, and provide some answers to the highlighted questions through a case study that
disaggregates SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation.
2. Background
The MDGs served as the first unified, global attempt to put sustainable development at the
forefront of the world’s political agendas. The success of the SDGs is dependent on global leaders and
sustainable development advocates not repeating past mistakes. The research presented in this paper
focus on the SDGs in relation to two main lessons: localization and data management.
The MDGs globalized international development, but they did not fully localize it. Local
governments often lacked the human and financial resources to deliver results required by the
targets, as well as the necessary indicators to demonstrate progress. Implemented projects that
provided services often didn’t reach targeted populations largely because the skills and resources
were not available at the local or regional level. In November 2016, United Nations Development
Program (UNDP) and the World Bank Group released a joint report that highlighted these as well
as other shortcomings and suggested that engagement with local communities and stakeholders
is necessary to mitigate and potentially remove roadblocks that may impede SDG implementation
(UN Development Program 2016). The SDGs state necessity of localization, but there are questions:
what is localization for SDGs; what factors determine the level of localization; what is the relationship
between localization and data and the impact on the SDGs?
Broadly speaking, localization is the process of making something local in character or restricting
it to a particular place. Many industries incorporate localization. For example, the software industry
localizes a product to make it marketable to a specific audience. In the publishing realm, it means
to translate a novel into the local language. Reviewing documents related to the SDGs and
international development overall, localization (or localizing development) has shifted from meaning
the implementation of development projects at the local level, by sub-national actors (i.e., local and
regional governments) to something that is more robust. For the purposes of this paper, localization
is defined as the implementation of supranational policy into projects at the appropriate subnational level
to ensure the service delivery to the appropriate level population. In other industries, like the software or
publishing, localizing level is determined by the return on investment (ROI). For example, when
Microsoft makes new software, its release in languages other than English is based on the total
amount of work required to translate and customize necessary to create different language editions
(Microsoft Developer Network 2018). Similarly, books are published in a local language and are only
published in another language if it is not cost-prohibitive. In each case, the level is determined by risk
and return. Determining the level of localization for the SDGs can be found in a similar fashion.
Localization prioritizes subnational planning and resource allocation by local and regional
governments in a specific sector based on subnational variations (Lucci 2015). Responsibility for
public services related to the SDGs varies across countries because of subsidiarity1 and national
mandates based on constitutions. The localization level determination methodology should not be
rigid and understand the linkages between mandates of line ministries and/or sector governance within a given country. Per Localizing the SDGs.org2 , the approach to determining the level should
be flexible, simple, and adaptive to national variations. Water supply and sanitation, for example,
can range from being a delegated responsibility to municipalities to being a state-owned enterprise
operated at the national level. To determine the localization level of SDG6, Targets 1 and 2, assessment
of state’s water, sanitation and hygiene (WaSH) mandate should determine the most appropriate level.
Determining the level is not the only question to be answered about localization.
Identifying the subnational level to localize will focus attention on local capacity development,
building ownership and responsibility. The cost of localizing, however, is still not addressed. Success of
the SDGs depends on each country being responsible for their own economic and social development
(UN General Assembly 2015). It also calls for an increased emphasis for countries and their subnational
governments to move away from allowing or contracting external entities and towards managing local
projects themselves. However, one of the shortcomings with the MDGs was limited local capacity
to execute projects. Localization is an important element for implementing the SDGs. However,
determining localizing level has proven easier than financing localized development. Another lesson
learned from the MDGS, data management, is just as complex.
For a long time, data was associated with hard sciences, but it is ubiquitous today, used to analyze
everything from sports to policy. In 1989, the first Knowledge Discovery in Databases workshop
presented the concepts of data mining and use of data as a predictive tool (Press 2013). The proliferation
of the internet and the world’s technological capacity grew to 15.8 exabytes,3 giving the world the
ability to generate more data about our lives, but also creating the problem of what to do with all this
information. At the same time, the Rio Declaration (1992) brought extreme poverty, climate change,
and other development issues to the forefront of the global policy agenda. Data analysis is a valuable
tool for addressing these problems, allowing stakeholders to collaborate and develop data-driven
policy-making. The MDGs also attempted to leverage the power of data, but with mixed results.
Data as it pertains to monitoring, evaluation and management were big concerns for the post-2015
agenda (UN Economic and Social Council 2016). In their 2011 analysis, Poku and Whitman identified
several data issues related to the MDGs: the 1990 baseline statistics were not available; the indicators
were not being compiled by government agencies within national statistical systems (NSS); indicators
may not be comparable across countries because of differences in compilation methodologies and/or
definitions; some indicators may not be consistent across years because of differences in data sources;
and most of the indicators are not compiled at the sub-national level (Poku and Whitman 2011).
In some cases, data points on MDG performance have been estimated or modeled by international
agencies. The Overseas Development Institute (ODI) also states that the data gaps are more serious
than just statistical errors in reporting, they mean the data missing could have been used to improve
the lives of those in LDCs and data gaps impact the accuracy of government plans and affect the
allocation efficiency of budgets (Stuart et al. 2015).
A few years after the 2000 Millennium Summit that launched the MDGs, the Second
International Roundtable on Managing for Development Results agreed upon the 2004 Marrakech
Action Plan for Statistics (World Bank 2004). Understanding the shortfalls of the MDGs as they
related to data management, SDG targets 17.184 and 17.195 refer directly to capacity building linked to data, monitoring and accountability. To further reinforce the commitment to data
management, the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data (Cape Town Plan)
proposed six strategic areas with its own objectives and implementation actions in January 2017
(High-Level Group for Partnership, Coordination and Capacity-Building 2017). The Cape Town Plan
and its objectives and action items frequently mention data disaggregation and this policy underpins
the United Nations (UN) resolution of the SDGs, “to leave no one behind.” Data management is
a concern for the SDGs, raising many questions: what does data mean for the SDGs? What is the
relationship of localization and data? What are some approaches to manage data for the SDGs? Before
these questions can be answered, some basics about data as it relates to this research should be defined.
In 2005, the United States National Science Foundation (NSF) released a report
delineating the differences between, and importance of, data science and data management
(National Science Foundation 2005). Data science merges statistics, data analysis and other related
fields to understand and analyze actual phenomena as well as establish trends with data (Hayashi 1998).
Data Management is development and execution of architectures, policies, practices and procedures
to manage the information lifecycle needs of an enterprise in an effective manner. In the simplest of
terms, data science collects, refines and produces data for particular uses, whereas data management
is the architecture and governance of data collected, refined and produced.
We are in an era in which the generation of wealth, power, culture and the like is based on
technological capacity, with information technologies at its core (Castells 2000). Data processing as
it was traditionally known has now transitioned into big data due to the volume and complexity of
data since the late 1990s (Hilbert 2016). Information and communication technology for development
(ICT4D) is the application of big data for development and offers many opportunities and challenges
(Unwin 2009). On one hand, recent advances provide cost-effective methods to improve development
decision-making and citizen science and information allow for officials to hear the perspective from
the customer. On the other hand, the areas that need the most help are where more data is needed
and is also where technological infrastructure is lacking the most. The quality and quantity of data
in our time presents the problem of how to make the necessary relationships so it is useful. Data
disaggregation is one method of doing so.
Data disaggregation refers to numerical or non-numerical inputs that have been (1) collected
from multiple sources and/or on multiple measures, variables, or individuals; (2) compiled
into aggregate data—i.e., summaries of data—typically for the purposes of public reporting
or statistical analysis; and then (3) broken down in component parts or smaller units of data
(The Glossary of Education Reform 2015). Data disaggregation looks to uncover discrepancies that
aggregated data can mask by breaking down the data into appropriate groups. This is often
done in the fields of education, healthcare, and human rights. For example, understanding
graduation rates of high school students in a district by sex and ethnicity in addition to just school
or neighborhood. The UN Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights has shifted from
traditional data collection and analysis, which concentrates on national averages and risks the masking
of underlying disparities of disadvantaged or marginalized groups, to disaggregated data analysis
(Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights 2016). In each example, policy interventions can
be developed based on the correct statistical evidence for the appropriate audience and the appropriate
level. To understand the appropriate level, localization methodology can be implemented. Whereas the
issues with the MDGs focused on the data, many feel that disaggregation of data will be the challenge
for the SDGs.
The Inter-agency Expert Group on SDG Indicators (UN Statistics Division Inter-agency Expert
Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators 2015) (IAEG-SDGs) was convened to look at data
management for the SDGs overall as well as ensure that, “Sustainable Development Goal indicators
should be disaggregated, where relevant, by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability and geographic locations.”6 The IAEG-SDGs classified the 244 (232 with nine repeated
two or three times) indicators into three tiers on the basis of their level of methodological development
and the availability of data at the global level7 :

•
•
•

Tier 1: metadata are fully developed and data are available,
Tier 2: metadata are developed but data is not readily available or sparse,
Tier 3: methodological work is necessary to further develop the indicator metadata.

The Center for Global Development selected those indicators that have an impact on the SDG
mantra of “leaving no one behind” and found that none of them have data disaggregated by income,
race, ethnicity, migratory status, or disability status or relevant subgroups (Kalow and O’Donnell 2017).
A 2017 meeting of the IAEG-SDGs in Ottawa8 provided further guidance on data disaggregation,
announcing the Workplan on Data Disaggregation as well as defining it for the SDGs:
Disaggregation is the breakdown of observations within a common branch of a hierarchy to a
more detailed level to that at which detailed observations are taken. With standard hierarchical
classifications [ . . . ] categories can be split (disaggregated) when finer details are required and made
possible by the codes given to the primary observations.9
In addition, disaggregation dimensions and categories are mentioned but not fully delineated.
The question is no longer if data disaggregation, science and management should be done, the questions
then are: how much will it cost and who is responsible with respect to the SDGs?
Many subnational governments have limited financial and human resources for day-to-day
obligations, let alone complying with national mandates related to the SDGs. Jerven, in a working
paper for the Copenhagen Consensus Center, argues that proper monitoring of all 18 MDG targets
and 48 indicators would have cost the United Nations approximately $27bn (Morten 2014). The total
cost looks high, but when compared to the total of about $1.9tn spent globally on development aid
over the same period, 1.4% of the total Overseas Development Aid (ODA) is within reason. Jerven
and others argue that when it comes to monitoring and evaluation (M&E), there are more estimations
than hard numbers with the MDGs, and these estimations are more likely observations with no
consistent formulaic approach. Jerven estimates that to accurately monitor for the current SDGs,
17 goals, 169 targets and plethora of indicators, it will cost at least $254 billion, which is more than
the global spend on ODA annually or 12.5% of ODA aid over the SDG timeframe. In addition to
the cost of M&E, there was and still is the local capacity issue. About 60 countries have basic data
management systems required for M&E at this scale and most LDCs do not have the capacity to collect
useful data on a national basis. The $254 billion estimate also does not account for staffing, operation
and maintenance, training and retaining personnel, analyzing, or disseminating the data.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA) emphasizes the importance of high quality,
disaggregated data and prioritizes capacity building with the understanding that tracking SDG
progress will further strain already stressed LDC’s administrative offices, specifically NSS, to collect
and analyze data in new areas (UN 2015). AAAA also understands that this shift to better data
management will require increasing resources for data and building capacity, with the support of the
international community financially, in-kind, or both as needed. The Cape Town Plan furthers the
AAAA, highlighting the principles of completeness of scope, accountability, and cooperation in order to
accomplish its strategic areas and objectives for better disaggregated data management. At first pass,
the IAEG-SDGs could appear to be the custodian but was tasked to develop and implement the global
indicator framework for the goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda only. Furthermore, it is a group of representatives from member states and not its own entity or bureaucracy within the UN system
or SDG-mandated organization. The IAEG-SDGs assigned indicator custodians who work on tier
classification only but not for overall goals let alone the SDGs. Appendix A shows the custodians of
the indicators for SDG6 and demonstrates that there is no common custodian even within a specific
goal and some indicators have multiple custodians. At the fifth and sixth meetings of the IAEG-SDGs
there was no mention of an overall SDG data custodian. Review of SDG-related documentation,
IAEG-SDG will provide guidance on data disaggregation and indicators and subnational governments
are responsible for providing data but data management and a data custodian is not present.
The design of a study is more important than the statistical analysis; a study that is a poorly
designed study can never be recouped, but a study that is poorly analyzed can be re-analyzed. Agenda
2030 understands the issues of design and analysis that the MDGs faced with respect to localization and
raises the question of how cross-cutting and sector-specific goals, data, and monitoring and evaluation
will be executed effectively and efficiently.10 The SDGs allude to the linkage between localization and
data disaggregation but do not elucidate the importance of the relationship: localization determines
the level and disaggregation determines how to separate what at that level. The following case
study looks at SDG6 Clean Water and Sanitation and suggests methodologies to answer some of the
outstanding questions.
3. Case Study
Case studies are useful tools to test theoretical models with real world situations. Although it
will not answer a question completely, a case study will provide guidance on how to move forward.
SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation will be the subject of the case study for localization of SDGs
through disaggregation of KPIs. The aim of the study is to highlight methodologies for localization,
disaggregation, and development of inter-linkages between SDGs to develop new KPIs that unmask
discrepancies for more effective and efficient policy interventions.
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WaSH) services were high on the priority list in the 2030 Agenda
after playing a minor role in the MDGs (MDG 7, Target 10) (UN Millenium Development Goals 2015).
According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and
Hygiene (JMP), 89% of the global population used at least a basic drinking water service and 68% of
the global population used at least basic sanitation services as of 2015 (World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (2017)). In absolute numbers, that is 844
million who lack basic drinking water services11 and 2.3 billion who lack basic sanitation services12 .
Furthermore, proper WaSH access has the potential to prevent at least 9.1% of the global disease
burden and 6.3% of all deaths (Prüss-Üstün Annette et al. 2008). Beyond the startling statistics, WaSH
provides the opportunity for understanding localization and disaggregation.
WaSH as a formal service delivery tends to be a natural monopoly due to high sunk costs related
to infrastructure and other economies of scale. In addition, the governance of this sector has many
subnational variations that are directly related to national constitutions, line ministry mandates and
sector governance. For example, responsibility for WaSH in Zambia is shared by the Ministry of
Local Government and Housing (policy), National Water Supply and Sanitation Council (economic
regulation), and local government-owned commercial utilities (supply), whereas in neighboring
Uganda responsibility is shared by the Ministry of Water and Environment (policy and regulation),
National Water and Sewerage Corporation (supply) and local governments with populations of 5000 to 30,000 (supply) (Patole 2010). These factors, scale, scope, governance, and national mandates impact
how to localize SDG 6 relative to each subnational government, indicating responsibilities at each level.
The two examples used for this research are SDG 6 disaggregated in relation to SDG 3: Good
Health and Well Being and SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities. Table 1 breaks down the
metadata of SDG 6 by tier and identifies the indicators. Indicator 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 criteria, for example,
would draw metrics from the JMP (global leader in monitoring WaSH), Indicator 6.3.1 from WHO and
6.3.2 from UN Environment for SDG 6. A similar exercise would be done for SDG 3 and 11 to identify
potential relationships such as Indicator 3.9.213 and 11.1.114 for SDG 3 and 11, respectively. Table 2
shows the analysis that results in identifying common criteria and variables that can be used form KPI
development. It is important to note the importance of data disaggregation at the local level to account
for local variations in the design and implementation of projects, especially for WaSH. However, this
was beyond the scope of this particular study.
Table 1. SDG 6 targets and indicators (excerpt from Appendix A, Table A1).
Goal 6. Ensure Availability and Sustainable Management of Water and Sanitation for All
Target

Indicator

Tier

Custodian

6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to
safe and affordable drinking water for all

6.1.1 Proportion of population
using safely managed
drinking water services

I

WHO
UNICEF

6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable
sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation,
paying special attention to the needs of women and girls
and those in vulnerable situations

6.2.1 Proportion of population
using safely managed
sanitation services, including a
hand-washing facility with
soap and water

I

WHO
UNICEF

6.3.1 Proportion of wastewater
safely treated

II

WHO
UN-Habitat
UNSD

6.3.2 Proportion of bodies of
water with good ambient
water quality

III

UN
Environment

6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing
pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release
of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the
proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse globally

Source: IAEG-SDG (2016).

WaSH has many qualitative and quantitative measures that can be disaggregated. The JMP
2017 progress report, for example, breaks down service by level, by global region, by proportion
of household income, and vulnerable populations to name a few.15 The report disaggregates the
data to highlight discrepancies that the aggregated data hides. For example, although 89% of the
world has access to at least basic drinking water, only 71% of the world has access to safely managed
drinking water. Disaggregating that 71%, only 24% Sub-Saharan Africa currently satisfy SDG 6.1.1.,
where the UN anticipates population to double by 2050 (UN Population Division 2017). The simple
disaggregation exercise shows how a relatively positive KPI is masking major problems and at the
same time highlights where efforts can do the most to improve a situation.
The case study presents a simple methodology for localization of SDGs through disaggregation of
KPIs. Below are the main steps:
Understand
IAEG-SDGs Indicator Custodian metadata for SDG,
Table 2. Related Goals and Targets to SDG 6 (Excerpt from Appendix B, Table A2). 
#

Additional global/regional standards
related to SDG if possible,
Disaggregated SDG 6

Potential Common Criteria and 
Understand
secondary SDG metadata
to identify common criteria
and variables,
SDG 6 Target 
Related SDG Target 
Variables 
Develop common KPI for primary/secondary SDG for disaggregation analysis.

11.1 By 2030, ensure access  Criteria: Age, Sex, Income, Location, 
Vulnerable Population 
6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and 
for all to adequate, safe 
Table 2. Related Goals and Targets
to SDG 6 (Excerpt from Appendix B, Table A2).
equitable access to safe and 
and affordable housing 
Variable: Distance to drinking water 
affordable drinking water for all 
and basic services and 
point, Hours of drinking water 
Disaggregated SDG 6
upgrade slums 
service  Potential Common Criteria and
SDG 6 Target
Related SDG TargetCriteria: Age, Sex, Income, Location, 
6.2 By 2030, achieve access to 
Variables
11.1 By 2030, ensure access 
adequate and equitable sanitation 
Vulnerable Population 
Criteria:
Age,
Sex, Income,
11.1 By 2030, ensure access for
for all to adequate, safe 
Location,
Vulnerable
Population
and hygiene for all and end open 
6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access
to all to adequate, safe and
and affordable housing 
defecation, paying special attention 
Variable: Distance from Domicile to 
affordable housing and basic
Variable: Distance to drinking
safe and affordable drinking water for all
and basic services and 
services and upgrade slums
water point, Hours of drinking
to the needs of women and girls and 
Sanitary Facility 
upgrade slums 
water service
those in vulnerable situations 
Criteria: Age, Sex, Income,
for
6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable 11.1 By 2030, ensure access
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by 
Criteria: Mortality rate, Pollution 
Location, Vulnerable Population
3.9 By 2030, substantially 
sanitation
and
hygiene
for
all
and
end
open
all
to
adequate,
safe
and
reducing pollution, eliminating 
type,   
defecation, paying special attention to the needs
of
affordable housing and basic
reduce the number of 
Variable: Distance from Domicile
dumping and minimizing release of 
women and girls and those in vulnerable situations
services and upgrade slums
to Sanitary Facility
deaths and illnesses from 
hazardous chemicals and materials, 
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing
3.9
By
2030,
substantially
hazardous chemicals and 
Criteria: Mortality rate,
halving the proportion of untreated 
Variable: Percent water treated, 
pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing
reduce the number of deaths
air, water and soil 
Pollution type,
release of hazardous chemicals and materials,
and illnesses from hazardous
wastewater and substantially 
water‐related child mortality rate 
pollution and 
halving the proportion of untreated wastewater
and chemicals and air, water and
increasing recycling and safe reuse 
Variable: Percent water treated,
substantially increasing recycling and safe contamination 
soil pollution
globally 
water-related child mortality rate
reuse globally
and contamination

Figures 1 and 2 are the visual representation of the final step, the development of a new KPI. 
Figures 1 and 2 are the visual representation of the final step, the development of a new KPI.
Figure 1 shows the disaggregation of SDG 3, Target 9, Indicator 2 intersecting with SDG 6, Target 3, 
Figure 1 shows the disaggregation of SDG 3, Target 9, Indicator 2 intersecting with SDG 6, Target 3,
and Indicators 1 and 2 creating the KPI Total number and Proportion of deaths related to water bodies with 
and
Indicators 1 and 2 creating the KPI Total number and Proportion of deaths related to water bodies with
improved ambient water quality. A similar exercise was done in Figure 2, creating the KPI Proportion of 
improved ambient water quality. A similar exercise was done in Figure 2, creating the KPI Proportion of
housing with safely managed water supply and sanitation services. 
housing
with safely managed water supply and sanitation services.

 
Figure 1. Disaggregation Analysis of SDG 3 and SDG 6. 
Figure 1. Disaggregation Analysis of SDG 3 and SDG 6.

The relationship in Figure 1 quantifies “substantial” for 3.9.2 in terms of total number and overall 
The relationship in Figure 1 quantifies “substantial” for 3.9.2 in terms of total number and overall
proportion. 
Water quality
quality 
can 
increase 
in  relation 
to  what 
is  useful
not  as ifuseful 
if  water 
quality 
proportion. Water
can
increase
butbut 
in relation
to what
is not as
water quality
increases
increases and reduces disease burden and death. Through disaggregation, the relationship identifies 
and
reduces disease burden and death. Through disaggregation, the relationship identifies the World
the World Health Organization as a common data custodian and therefore lower cost for big data 
Health Organization as a common data custodian and therefore lower cost for big data harmonization.
harmonization. If Zambia implements a project to reduce mortality rate of water‐borne illness and 
If
Zambia implements a project to reduce mortality rate of water-borne illness and investment in
investment in secondary or tertiary water supply treatment, resources can be coordinated to augment 
secondary
or tertiary water supply treatment, resources can be coordinated to augment both projects
both projects due to the relatedness of KPI. 
due to the relatedness of KPI.

Economies 2018, 6, 15
Economies 2018, 6, x   

9 of 17
9 of 16 

 

Figure 2. Disaggregation Analysis of SDG 11 and SDG 6. 
Figure 2. Disaggregation Analysis of SDG 11 and SDG 6.

The relationship in Figure 2 provides a qualifying value for inadequate housing with respect to 
The
relationship in Figure 2 provides a qualifying value for inadequate housing with respect to
water and sanitation. Without disaggregation, 11.1.1 would satisfy the access to water or sanitation 
water and sanitation. Without disaggregation, 11.1.1 would satisfy the access to water or sanitation
requirement as per SDG 11 metadata with “improved” access. However, additional resources would 
requirement
as per SDG 11 metadata with “improved” access. However, additional resources would
be needed to then upgrade the project so that it satisfies SDG 6, which is one full level above SDG 11, 
be needed to then upgrade the project so that it satisfies SDG 6, which is one full level above SDG 11,
requiring safely managed water supply and sanitation on site as per SDG 6 metadata. In the case of 
requiring
safely managed water supply and sanitation on site as per SDG 6 metadata. In the case of
Uganda, NWSC can coordinate with the respective authority and level administering SDG 11 projects 
Uganda, NWSC can coordinate with the respective authority and level administering SDG 11 projects
for housing to ensure it is in compliance with SDG 6 requirements for water and sanitation.
for
housing to ensure it is in compliance with SDG 6 requirements for water and sanitation.  
The examples of disaggregation provided in the case study demonstrate the potential of such a 
The
examples of disaggregation provided in the case study demonstrate the potential of such a
technique. Deeper understanding of the SDGs, their targets and indicators can facilitate development 
technique. Deeper understanding of the SDGs, their targets and indicators can facilitate development
of project design toolkits. The frameworks provided can improve the design and implementation of 
of
project design toolkits. The frameworks provided can improve the design and implementation of
more effective and efficient projects at the local level, thus achieving the SDGs faster. The metadata 
more effective and efficient projects at the local level, thus achieving the SDGs faster. The metadata
generated through
through disaggregation
disaggregation 
improve 
the  quality 
and  impact 
of  localized 
and 
generated
cancan 
improve
the quality
and impact
of localized
projectsprojects 
and increase
increase 
the 
value 
per 
development 
dollar. 
Moreover, 
the 
involvement 
of 
local 
stakeholders 
will 
the value per development dollar. Moreover, the involvement of local stakeholders will build local
build  local and
ownership 
capacity 
that 
lead  to  the  operationalization 
of discussion
projects.  Further 
ownership
capacity and 
that can
lead to
the can 
operationalization
of projects. Further
related
discussion 
related 
to 
localization, 
data, 
disaggregation 
and 
the 
case 
study 
are 
to localization, data, disaggregation and the case study are provided in the followingprovided 
section. in  the 
following section.   
4. Discussion
4. Discussion 
The research conducted aims to further the discussion on localization and data disaggregation in
The research conducted aims to further the discussion on localization and data disaggregation 
the context
of international development. It raises other concerns about the potential shortcomings
in the context of international development. It raises other concerns about the potential shortcomings 
of
the implementation of SDGs related to localization and data management. Many points worth
of  the  implementation 
SDGs to
related 
to  localization 
and  data during
management. 
Many 
points 
worth 
highlighting
specificallyof 
related
responsibility
were uncovered
the course
of this
research.
highlighting specifically related to responsibility were uncovered during the course of this research. 
Localization was one of the major shortcomings of various international development agendas
priorLocalization was one of the major shortcomings of various international development agendas 
to the SDGs. Being viewed as a panacea, the questions of what and why for localization have
prior to the SDGs. Being viewed as a panacea, the questions of what and why for localization have 
been
widely documented but no formal guidance on how and who will do it. One suggested approach
been was
widely 
documented 
but study
no  formal 
on  how 
and  who  will 
do  it. 
One  suggested 
that
mentioned
in the case
is the guidance 
development
of a localization
analysis
toolkit.
Similar to
approach that was mentioned in the case study is the development of a localization analysis toolkit. 
the analysis conducted by the IAEG-SDG to identify the data custodians, an analytical framework
Similar 
the  analysis 
conducted 
by  the  IAEG‐SDG 
to  identify 
the responsibilities.
data  custodians, 
analytical 
could
beto 
developed
to create
an international
clearinghouse
on sector
Anan 
inventory
of
framework could be developed to create an international clearinghouse on sector responsibilities. An 
governments
can be disaggregated relative to SDGs and linked to factors that influence sector KPIs
inventory of governments can be disaggregated relative to SDGs and linked to factors that influence 
such
as national mandate, economies of scale, sector governance, stakeholder roles and responsibilities,
sector KPIs such as national mandate, economies of scale, sector governance, stakeholder roles and 
etc.
The exercise will also mitigate resources wasted on initial stakeholder analysis and standardizing
responsibilities, etc. The exercise will also mitigate resources wasted on initial stakeholder analysis 
the
process.
and standardizing the process. 
  Guiding Principles Of Data Reporting And Data Sharing For The
The IAEG-SDG released its
The IAEG‐SDG
Global
Monitoring Of released its Guiding Principles Of Data Reporting And Data Sharing For The Global 
The 2030 Agenda For Sustainable Development (Guiding Principles) and is holding
Monitoring  Of  The  2030  Agenda  For  Sustainable  Development  (Guiding  Principles)  and  is  holding consultation on the inter-linkages for SDG indicators in late 2017.16 The broader issue of who is
responsible for data management, governance and related fields appears to remain a burden for NSSs
and resource-poor subnational governments. MDG data issues such as data gaps for baseline country
data, standard data formats and integration, data integrity and access are bound to be repeated if
the international development community remain on the same path. The suggestion is to formalize
the responsibility of the UN Statistical Division and IAEG-SDG to being the global custodians of
development data, responsible for management and governance of the data. Looking at the case
study, WaSH industry standards can be harmonized, such as users per connection or employees per
connection and normalized based on the results of the localization analysis toolkit by data custodians.
The responsibility for the subnational governments would be to provide updates on a formal NSS
that feeds into the global statistical system. Although it may appear to be easier said than done,
the IAEG-SDG has already laid the foundation and ICT4D has a framework for organizing big data for
development. Who is willing to be responsible for this task is still yet to be determined.
The resource burden of the SDGs has an added layer of complexity for international development
with the push for localization and data. Who is responsible to pay for all of this? The World Bank
insists that local governments find a way to pay to achieve the SDGs rather than work on local capacity
because the finance gaps are too high to implement SDGs. Stated earlier, the estimate to accurately
monitor all 17 goals, 169 targets and plethora of indicators may cost $254 billion. What is the right
proportion of resources spent on M&E of the SDGs versus the proportion spent on projects and
programs that contribute to the SDGs? The suggested coordinating unit at the supranational level
that is responsible for standardization, integration, and governance of data can reduce redundancies
and lessen the financial burden across the board due to economies of scale. Moreover, it will allow
for subnational actors to increase their capacity at a more sustainable rate without the sacrificing
their other local responsibilities. Furthermore, indicator disaggregation can improve the return on
development investments, freeing up resources for additional projects or capacity development.
The case study used in this is a demonstration of disaggregation. The methodology suggestion is
one of the numerous ways of disaggregating the SDGs. However, who would be responsible for this is
a cause for concern. Disaggregation needs the context of scale and scope of localization. The variability
due to subsidiarity can be overcome with guidance from data organizations or toolkits that provide
steps to conduct localization exercises for disaggregation.
5. Conclusions
The SDGs look to overcome the mistakes of the MDGs while forwarding the cause. The importance
of data and the desire to have numbers drive policy in recent years has been a concern for many
groups and one for the international community implementing the SDGs. What is the right proportion
of resources spent on M&E of the SDGs versus the proportion spent on projects and programs that
contribute to the SDGs? Will the indicators provide the guidance necessary for subnational actors to
operationalize the SDGs on the ground? Understanding the shortcomings, data disaggregation and
localization combined may provide the necessary answers but are not without their own issues.
Agenda 2030 is daunting but not insurmountable to achieve. The utilization of localization and
data disaggregation of key performance indicators are valuable assets towards achieving sustainable
development. The case study used aims to highlight the advantages of these two points while exploring
how to bridge the gaps therein. For SDG 6 and others, the best chance of success comes if cities and
subnational actors work to improve performance, not necessarily in comparison to each other, but in
comparison to their own status from when they began. The SDGs, their targets and indicators can
and will influence decisions on the ground. The data is important, but decisions should have a mix of quantitative and qualitative analysis that understands that the heart of international development is to
improve the quality of life, not quality of data.
Recommendations
The feasibility of a central or supra-national data management unit should be further investigated.
The economies of scale that could be achieved may provide some answers on how to alleviate the
resource burden tied to M&E of international development. Furthermore, the inclusionary practice
of an entity may foster better governance and standardization of practices that could accelerate
development by unmasking data discrepancies. Questions such as the cost of bureaucracy, technology
and energy requirements for ICT4D at the global level, impact of complete versus sampling in data
drive policy interventions and the like should be investigated further.
Further research on the development and implementation of localization and disaggregation
frameworks should be conducted. How to disaggregate and localize the SDGs would be a valuable
tool for local governments, implementing partners and others to appropriately develop projects that
properly address the indicators of the SDGs and avoid duplication of efforts resulting in wasted
resources. The methodology used in the case study was a rudimentary approach, given the limited
resources, but can be used as a springboard for further study. The framework for disaggregation is in
the early stages of development as observed in the proceedings of the Sixth Meeting of the IAEG-SDGs
in Bahrain. However, it should be vetted by independent third parties.
Although not part of the scope of this study, it is necessary to understand the local variations
of any SDG related sector when establishing local context of disaggregation. The development of
projects based on data disaggregation should understand this as part of the process The case study
utilized SDG 6 and the WaSH sector has many national and subnational variations, such as hydraulic
capacity, population, pollution, and competing users and uses, which can provide local context in
disaggregation at the local level. For example, reviewing SDG 3 in relation to SDG 6, local interventions
to improve water quality can vary based on the chemical or biological pollutants, availability of water
sources and/or population density.
