The challenge

Food systems in both developed and developing countries are changing rapidly. Increasingly
characterized by a high degree of vertical integration, evolutions in food systems are being
driven by new technologies that are changing production processes, distribution systems,
marketing strategies, and even the food products that people eat (World Economic Forum, 2018;
Stordalen and Fan, 2018).
These changes in the global food system have opened up enormous opportunities. Modern food
systems have vast potential to underpin economic growth, create jobs (World Bank, 2018a), and
satisfy changing consumer demand, especially in those developing countries experiencing rapid
urbanization – the World Bank (2013) estimate that urban food and beverage consumption in
Sub-Saharan Africa will grow by USD400 billion by 2030. They also offer the opportunity for
system-wide change in the way in which production interacts with the environment, giving
greater attention to the ecosystem services offered by the agricultural sector (Ingram et al.,
2016).
However, developments in food systems also pose new challenges and controversies. Food
system changes have responded to shifts in consumer preferences towards larger shares of more
animal-sourced and processed foods in diets, raising concerns regarding the calorific and
nutritional content of many food items (Baker. and Friel, 2016). Increased market concentration
and the need to produce for a more integrated global market have raised new barriers to market
access for smallholder farmers and small-scale food producers and service providers.
Improvements in food chains have helped to reduce food loss through improved storage,
handling, and conservation, but, by increasing food availability, lowering prices and increasing
quality standards, has also induced greater food waste at the consumer end. In addition, the
dominance of GVCs comes with the increased risk of fast transmission of food-borne disease
and food-related health risks throughout the food chain (FAO, 2017a). The ecological footprint
of the global food system continues to grow in terms of energy, resource use, and the
contribution to greenhouse gas emissions (FAO, 2017b).
Investments in food system innovations are key in driving change towards more a more
sustainable and food secure future. The scale and type of investment in food systems are largely
determined by the decisions of both small and large scale private sector actors, decisions that
both respond to and shape market opportunities created by changing consumer demands. While
investment in post-production processing and distribution activities have seen the rapid
development and penetration of modernized food systems, the level of investment in developing
countries has often been inadequate to promote the transformation from traditional systems
towards food systems that improve dietary quality and environmental sustainability while taking
advantage of efficiency gains. Furthermore, in those regions where investments in modern food
systems have been significant, the extent of the sustainability challenges faced suggests that the
types of investments have often been incompatible with the development of inclusive and sustainable food systems and therefore with the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) that comprise the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 1.
The key challenge therefore, is one of ensuring that investment is adequate to drive dynamic
food system development and has the quality of promoting inclusive and sustainable systems
required to allow the global food system to contribute to the delivery of the SDGs.

2

Meeting the challenge: encouraging SDG-compliant investments

Investing in food system developments that are compliant with the SDGs requires redirecting
existing and new investments into more resource-efficient and climate-resilient production
methods along the entire food chain and into improved infrastructure that connects farmers to
markets and allow proceeds of value addition to be captured by vulnerable producers and
households. As recognized in paragraph 4 of the G20 Action Plan on Food Security and
Sustainable Food Systems, this includes support for innovation and technologies that allow
efficiency improvements without compromising food safety, nutritional quality, access,
availability and wider goals linked to delivering ecosystem services associated with agriculture.
Private investment decisions are influenced by public sector interventions and by the quality of
governance mechanisms for food security. Investments in agrifood systems often tend to be
considered high risk because of weather variability and other factors such as unstable
macroeconomic conditions (World Bank, 2018b). Such risks are exacerbated in contexts
characterized by weak rule of law, unclear regulatory landscapes, or a lack of clear strategic
vision. The global nature of food systems requires that more coordinated action be taken at the
global level to ensure that this challenge is met.
Action is therefore required at two levels: (a) the design of instruments that encourage SDGcompliant investment in food systems, and (b) strengthening food system governance.

A. Redesigning investment incentives
Instruments to encourage SDG compliant investment can work through both the demand and the
supply side of the food chain. On the demand side, interventions can aim to increase consumer
awareness and consumer choice for food consistent with healthier and more sustainable diets.
On the supply side, incentives can be created to reduce the risk of investing in food systems
while internalizing health and sustainability concerns.

Instruments that build on, and support the translation of, growing consumer
awareness into SDG compliant investment

The negative consequences of non-SDG-compliant food system developments are increasingly
being recognized by consumers. With growing consumer awareness, driven by concerns of the
environmental and health impacts of investments and current supply chain technologies and
practices, and by a desire among new generations of city dwellers to reconnect with the rural
heritage, opportunities exist to define and establish added-value products that are capable of
internalising social or environmental delivery within their price 2. These forces can be used to
fundamentally reshape food systems by stimulating coordinated government action in changing
the regulatory environment that in turn incentivises improved private sector investment
decisions.
Capitalizing on the opportunity to develop a clear market or demand-pull from this increased
awareness will depend on significant investment in infrastructure to enable value-adding
capabilities along the supply chain – from soil testing at the point of production, through remote
sensing to supporting sustainable certification of chains of custody, to cold chain transport and
storage - together with action to strengthen food system governance, and in establishing
awareness and trust among value chain actors. It will also require greater effort to foster
consumer confidence in the added value and positive attributes of the products they purchase.
In many contexts, private food businesses have taken primacy over public entities in setting
food commodity grades and standards. Existing private sector and multistakeholder initiatives
such as voluntary sustainability standards (VSS) (FAO/UNEP, 2014), covenants such as Origin
Green in Ireland 3, and consumer-business agreements such as those promoted by the Food
Foundation in the UK, can act as possible vehicles for change. Such initiatives, which set
standards for sustainable production and often include certification programmes to verify
compliance, can be used as tools to drive consumer choice on the one hand and to channel and
enhance the nascent demand for more sustainable food systems into market related investments
on the other. VSS can offer a more dynamic, responsive system compared to public standards
that may deliver a more stringent framework. However, the rigour of the process to define and
enforce standards in an independent way is key to establishing confidence.
In most contexts, these vehicles alone are insufficient and need to be accompanied by the use of
public policies and regulatory measures such as those relating to food labelling to ensure that
environmental and health-related costs are effectively internalized (Food Foundation, 2017;
Sonigo et al., 2012).
However, some regulatory approaches and private sector-led schemes have been seen to create
barriers to sustainable development and trade, primarily because of the costs of compliance and the potential exclusion of actors less able to afford these costs. Dispensations may need to be
made for small farmers, but in providing these, cognizance needs to be taken of the
transboundary nature of the global food system which will necessitate greater coordination at
the global level. Success also requires outreach to explain the economic, social and
environmental opportunities that such approaches and schemes present combined with
information and advice to support any transition in the adoption of new techniques and
practices.

(ii)

Instruments that encourage investment in food system developments subject
to a high degree of economic, climatic and/or political risk

Consumer awareness or pressure for SDG-compliant products may be insufficient in creating
the demand-pull for supply-side change, and hence may need to be complimented by smarter
incentives that target producers, processors and retailers. In particular, encouraging and
facilitating food system development compatible with sustainable development goals is likely to
depend on de-risking investments in regions where human and environmental insecurity are
great and food system governance is weak. International Finance Institutions need to improve
their provision of inclusive oriented lending as articulated in the G20 Inclusive Business
Framework (G20 Development Working Group, 2015). This will require that food system
thinking informs the international finance infrastructure and associated public sector initiatives
to crowd-in private sector investment in inclusive and resilient food systems by reducing levels
of risk faced by investors as reflected in section 3 of the 2017 G20 Hamburg Action Plan.
Instruments to promote “high risk” investment include:
a.

Blending of public and private sector funding to underwrite higher risk investment for
financial institutions and private sector investors (European Commission, 2016). This can
facilitate favourable lending agreements, including by the multilateral development banks,
for projects that have demonstrable returns in terms of delivering towards the achievement
of the SDGs, but which may be less attractive to investors than higher return, but non-SDG
compliant, investments.

b.

Tying loans and grants to compliance with safeguards and/or benchmarks. This could be
achieved by, for example, translating existing or revised voluntary guidelines (see below)
into tangible safeguards and benchmarks, with tighter criteria and more robust governance
frameworks.

c.

Public sector investment, including through Public-Private Partnership mechanisms, in
market infrastructure such as storage and wet market facilities, aimed at reducing volatility
in returns on investment.

B. Improving food system governance to mobilize investment
The approaches outlined above will depend on strong food system governance that creates a
more conducive enabling environment if they are to result in the delivery of investment in the
right places and in the right ways, and to do so effectively and in alignment with the SDGs.

Food policies which have traditionally focused on ways to enhance agricultural productivity and
to keep food prices at levels that balance (farm-level) producer and consumer interests, need to
be reoriented to take advantage of the opportunities provided by changing food systems. As
recognized in the 2015 G20 Action Plan on Food Security and Sustainable Food Systems, the
traditional approach to food policy must be reoriented towards food-system-wide approaches
that provide incentives for investments in inclusive and sustainable development of food
systems and for steering consumer behaviour and food preferences toward healthier and more
sustainable diets.
While policy in favour of enhancing productivity through subsidies on modern farm inputs,
direct income support to farmers and/or subsidies to keep food prices low for consumers has
been argued, under certain circumstances, to be supportive of improved food security (Dorward
and Morrison, 2015) such support measures do not tend to incentivise the adoption of climate
smart practices, nor do they necessarily promote the supply of food that contributes to healthier
diets.
Realigning support policies and incentive schemes will require action at a number of levels. The
transboundary nature of food systems and the public good nature of health and environmental
challenges means that global governance processes that ensure coordination of required
measures will be a key entry point in shaping the environment in which investments in food
system development are made. In turn, strengthened global governance of food systems
provides more robust frameworks within which countries design and implement national
policies, standards, regulations and mechanisms affecting these systems.

3

Proposals for G20 Action

In facilitating the redirection of investment in food systems compatible with the 2030 Agenda,
we suggest that the G20 take action in relation to each of the three categories of action
elaborated above:
(1) Strengthen global platforms for the benchmarking and coordination of private sector
sustainability initiatives that build on growing consumer awareness
The G20 should request that global platforms such as the United Nations Forum on
Sustainability Standards (UNFSS) 4 and the G20 Inclusive Business Platform are strengthened to
assist in reducing the complexity and multiplicity of private sector led schemes which can result
in a situation where producers lack information on which standard should be adhered to, where
suppliers need to comply with multiple standards to sell to different buyers, and/or where
consumers face difficulties in interpreting labelling and certification schemes.

Global policy platforms provide the opportunity to improve information and analysis from a
more holistic perspective, and to promote initiatives that avoid multiplication and instead
facilitate coordination among schemes, their convergence, and/or their mutual recognition. Such
platforms could also be strengthened to provide outreach and training to make producers aware
of the opportunities and to support the establishment of the product supply chains linking
producers with food processors, certification schemes and ultimately consumers, and allow
these standards to be compared and coordinated so that a product can be deemed compliant
across trade boundaries.
The G20 should also promote enhanced evidence-based decision making with improved
transparency and accountability, by supporting the development of indicators of social and
environmental externalities associated with developments in food systems by endorsing
partnerships and collaboration between organizations developing sustainability indicators and
policy-makers. For example, by supporting the Chatham House initiative on building land,
carbon and water footprints into www.resourcetrade.earth, as well as indicators of social impact
such as resource conflicts.
Greater accountability will need to be facilitated by policy research to provide greater
understanding of the effectiveness of context-specific interventions and by greater investments
in research and development to ensure that technologies and practices for sustainable
agriculture, land, and water management, as well as sustainable and inclusive downstream food
chain development are locally adoptable. The G20 should encourage sufficient resources to be
made available for the related policy research and R&D investments.
(2) Support coordinated implementation of voluntary guidelines to foster SDG-compliant
investment in higher risk contexts
The G20 should promote greater coherence, simplification and harmonization in the translation
of existing sets of voluntary guidelines 5 into toolkits and practical steps that can be used by
value chain actors in ensuring that their investment actions are aligned with the SDGs, and their
extension to all components of the food system. In line with paragraph 5 of their 2015 Action
Plan on Food Security and Sustainable Food Systems, the G20 may wish to request relevant
International Organizations including FAO, IFPRI, OECD and the World Bank to translate
existing guidelines into toolkits and practical steps, under the guidance of the Committee on
World Food Security (CFS) where appropriate.
In follow-up to the G20 Inclusive Business framework issued by the G20 Development
Working Group in 2015, the G20 should request that development banks upscale responsible
investment through improved approaches to blended financing by promoting the integration of
existing voluntary guidelines into the design of loan products and contractual arrangements
supportive of SDG compatible investment; that the G20 Eminent Persons Group on Global
Financial Governance consider improvements to the global financial architecture required to support such initiatives; and that the G20 Global Platform on Inclusive Business be further
strengthened.
(3) Promote greater coordination between multilateral fora to strengthen the global governance
of food system challenges
The G20 should act to ensure improved coherence in the development of the global governance
frameworks that are key to promoting the realignment of national policies affecting food system
development to address contemporary cross cutting challenges of health and environment and
hence in creating the environment for SDG compliant investment in food system development.
To achieve this, the G20 should request involved agencies to establish joint task forces to
review the current international architecture to identify areas in which coordination is required.
For example, the WHO, WTO, FAO and UNFCCC, collectively responsible for the global
governance of food safety, trade, nutrition and sustainability, could be requested to identify
actions required to ensure that strengthening rules on the use of policy instruments through
multilateral and regional trade agreements; regulating the use of non-tariff barriers to trade;
enforcing regulations to stamp out illegal or unsustainable production practices where they
continue; enhancing food system transparency and supply chain traceability, including through
intergovernmental platforms such as the Agricultural Market Information System (a G20
initiative); and building momentum behind non-financial disclosure of environmental and social
risks, are compatible with and incentivise development in food systems supportive of the
achievement of the SDGs.