
INTRODUCTION

In light of increased competition, innovation has now
become crucial for any firms to achieve sustainable
competitive advantage [7, 65, 86]. In conjunction
with this dynamic and competitive setting,
undoubtedly, firms can no longer innovate solely [7,
81, 86, 87]. Therefore, to a great extent,
manufacturing firms are increasingly dependent on
their key or strategic suppliers to do everything that is
not their core capability and innovate effectively [46,
59, 63, 81, 86, 90]. They involve suppliers to
accomplish products, to come up with a new process
and offer services that are not only of the best
possible quality, lowest cost, reduced complexity, but
also help them in enhancing their internal and
external capabilities. Many firms have begun to
understand that acquiring added value in their
products, process or services is associated in the
supplier network [17] and they could benefit more by
partnering with innovative suppliers as well as
involving them more in collaborative development of
new products, processes or services [46, 81, 109].
Having known the importance of suppliers for
innovation activities [86], selecting the right
suppliers,
managing
them
effectively
and
implementing long-term relationship is imperative to
leverage supplier’s capabilities as well as to cope
with dynamic market [6, 20, 32, 64].
Sourcing Innovation (SI) is such an emerging
paradigm that highlights how the sourcing function
could help the firms to be innovative by actively
involving their key or strategic suppliers in creating
innovative products, processes or services of next
competitive advantage [49, 95, 105]. [87] says that
firms should perceive this sourcing innovation as a
strategy in managing lower total cost, lower risk,
shorter lead time and flexibility. Likewise, [87]
acknowledges this strategic consideration to be
significant for firms in this collaborative innovation
setting in achieving sustainable competitive
advantage. This active, strategic and intense
collaboration named sourcing innovation will offer
an opportunity for the participating suppliers to have
an improved understanding of the consumer’s needs
as well as the long term objectives of the buying firm
[87].
Even though the theories of sourcing and innovation
have been there for years, the confluence of these two
concepts, termed “sourcing innovation”, is eminent
only in the recent years. Hence, the authors have
merely used the terminology in their contributions
and there is a significant lack when it comes to
empirical research addressing this term sourcing
innovation [75, 80]. Since sourcing innovation is a
recent phenomenon, extant literature is still unclear
about its conceptualization. Therefore, it is important
to gain a nuanced theoretical as well as practical
understanding of sourcing innovation by synthesizing
current literature.
Against this backdrop, following extant literature,
this study envisions sourcing innovation to
encompass the four key elements such as strategic
level of the sourcing function [5, 21, 61, 88],
innovativeness of the focal firm [43, 44, 91, 106],
ability of the supplier to innovate, willingness of the
supplier to participate in innovation initiatives taken
by the focal firm [33, 41, 43, 79], and early supplier
involvement in new product development [16, 28, 80,
107]. In summary, this study proposes that if the level
of these key dominant capabilities and observable
practices is high within a firm, then the level of
sourcing innovation would also be considered high in
that firm. This paper employs dynamic capabilities
approach as the theoretical lens to offer new insights
on this recent paradigm sourcing innovation, the
active strategic mechanism through which the firms
strategize superior performance. This research
acknowledges that sourcing innovation is emergent
and there seems not to exit robust frameworks for this
phenomenon. Therefore, this research aspires to
identify dominant capabilities and observable
practices for sourcing innovation from extant
literature. In addition, attempts to gain knowledge
from the sourcing personnel about their perception
concerning sourcing innovation and, in effect, answer
the following key research questions:
a) What dominant capabilities and
observable practices evince the effective
practice of sourcing innovation?

b) Are firms utilizing these acknowledged
dominant capabilities and observable
practices to promote the effective practice of
sourcing innovation?
By answering the questions, this research makes an
attempt to understand the conceptual domain of
sourcing innovation by theoretically and practically
defining the various theoretical elements that
underpin the complex concept. Additionally, given
that a major hindrance to understanding the dynamics
of any complex phenomena is in untangling its
various components, this research effort would not
only facilitate further research on sourcing
innovation, but would also help practitioners to better
understand the scope of the problems and
opportunities associated with sourcing innovation.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
The next section presents a brief description of the
theoretical background of sourcing innovation with
specific emphasis on the observable practices and
capabilities of sourcing innovation as highlighted in
the extant body of literature as well as the
explanation of dynamic capability approach. This is
followed by an explanation of the exploratory and
interpretative research approach. Subsequently, the
findings of this exploratory study are discussed
within the context of extant literature. Finally,
conclusions including a discussion of the
implications, limitations and directions for future
research are presented.
2.

CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND

This section reviews extant theories and findings
from the literature related to the concept of sourcing
innovation and the observable practices and dominant
capabilities that would drive sourcing innovation
among firms. As per [108] recommendation this
exploratory study made use of prior research in
developing guidance for collecting and analyzing
data. In particular, this study adopts dynamic
capability as the theoretical lens and details its
relevance for firms in perceiving sourcing innovation
to achieve sustainable competitive advantage. First, it
starts with the review of dynamic capability approach
and then, the examination of the relevant findings
from the comprehensive literature concerning the
perception of sourcing innovation. Later, the review
explores the research on the key elements that
underpin the theory of sourcing innovation.
2.1 Dynamic Capability Approach
Dynamic capability approach has realized greater
importance in the recent years. This theory is a clear
extension of the resource based view of the firm [15,
22, 95, 105, 110]. Moreover, this approach enhances
resource based view by providing the firms the
different market environments [95, 105, 100, 54].
Teece, Pisano and Shuen originated a primitive
framework in the year 1997 and later more
theoretical papers have extended as well as explained
in various aspects the model of dynamic capabilities
[30, 105].
Resource based view can be considered only if the
selected firm setting is static and in today’s dynamic
market environment, unfortunately, the theory of
RBV could not be assigned to this unstable market
setting [15]. As a result, dynamic capabilities
approach is employed for such dynamic
environments
to
acknowledge
sustainable
competitive advantage. This in turn helps the firms to
continuously strengthen their functional and strategic
capabilities to address the constant changes in their
dynamic environment [42, 100]. [15] has mentioned
that the most distinct benefits of dynamic capabilities
absolutely depend on its early and effective adoption
to achieve long-term competitive advantage [30].
Additionally, [100] have stated that in order to
sustain the competitive advantage in today’s dynamic
environment, firms need to consistently build up their
resources and capabilities accordingly to the dynamic
settings.
[30] argues that development of innovative
products,
process
and
services,
strategic
understanding, and collaboration are the attributes of
dynamic capability. [56] acknowledges that the
dynamic capability includes certain extensive
elements
such
as
sensing,
seizing
and
transforming/reconfiguring
opportunities,
capabilities, supplier integration abilities as well as
the capacity to acquire new knowledge for
continuous innovation (i.e., organizational learning)
[94, 100, 110]. Concisely, “dynamic capabilities are
strategic tasks, supply chain partners exchange their
own resources and capabilities to integrate or
recombine them to form new value of competitive
advantage”, [22: 175].
2.2 Sourcing Innovation
The concept of sourcing innovation has gained
importance only in recent years. As a result, there is
some confusion in the terminology and authors adopt
diverse terminologies with distinct descriptions for
sourcing innovation: “innovation sourcing [57],
innovative sourcing, sourcing external innovation
[87], sourcing practices and innovation [105],
knowledge sourcing and innovation [96], sourcing
external knowledge for innovation [47], innovationrelated sourcing [95] and global sourcing and
innovation [25]” [72: 168]. In addition, though
authors discuss the concept of sourcing innovation,
there is a need for empirical research focusing on the
theoretical operationalization of sourcing innovation
as well as its role in achieving competitive advantage
[75, 80].

3

The most commonly used definition of sourcing
innovation describes it as “an affair between two
firms which increasingly results in substantial growth
for both firms” [87]. Following [95], our research
interprets sourcing innovation as a capability that
could help firms to collaborate, shape as well as
reconstruct the internal and external competences to
address the needs of rapidly changing markets. As
mentioned earlier, [87] claim that the sourcing
function focusing on innovation actively involves its
supply chain partners in the innovation efforts taken
by the focal firm so as to develop the products and
services of the next generation [69]. Above all, it is
noticed as a larger network level competency that
allows firms to effectively utilize the relationship
with external partners in their innovation
developments [74]. Accordingly, this paper will
adopt the definition of sourcing innovation as “an
operative engagement or commitment among firms
through which they both can achieve substantial
progress and confidence on each other to be
innovative” [72: 173].
While there are numerous practical examples of
sourcing innovation, a few are illustrated in this
paragraph. First, Volvo Car collaborated with its
supplier Delphi Automotive to generate RACam
integrated radar and vision system [26]. This
technology integration is helping Volvo to provide
optimal value to customers by enabling safety
features including adaptive cruise control, lane
departure warning, forward collision warning, as well
as autonomous braking for pedestrians and vehicles.
Second, The early involvement as well as continuous
efforts of BMW's for Borg Warner's 3 stage
turbocharger system (R3S) developed the basis of
intense collaboration partners resulting in a system
that advances turbo sealing, performance, charge
cooling, emissions and airflow management [10].
Third, the Kraft’s Food Group collaborated with their
supplier Sonoco Products Co. to create rotogravure
printed flexible package that revolutionized the
packaged food industry [84].
The above examples clearly convey the notion that an
intense collaboration among manufacturing firms and
their suppliers could lead to continuous superior
performances. Besides, sourcing innovation, without
doubt, is a practice of finding new ways to
collaborate intimately and innovate efficiently with
the existing supply base so as to achieve sustainable
competitive advantage [87]. In summary, the bestperforming firms encourage their suppliers to
innovate on their behalf and in fact, they do not make
any assumptions about their suppliers before
involving them in the innovation process. They
As mentioned earlier, the existence of sourcing
innovation among firms could be demonstrated
through dominant capabilities and observable
practices. Based on an extensive review of literature,
strategic level of sourcing function, firm
innovativeness, supplier innovativeness and early
supplier involvement are identified as key dominant
capabilities and observable practices that represent
the practice of sourcing innovation [21, 79, 87].
Figure 1 Dominant capabilities and observable
practices of Sourcing Innovation

A brief review of the recognized key dominant
capabilities and observable practices underpinning
the concept of sourcing innovation is next presented.
2.3.1
Strategic level of sourcing function
The role of the sourcing function in firms has shifted
from a support into a more strategic function [2, 6, 8].
Accordingly, the term strategic level of sourcing
function is an active approach that helps in
organizing the supply base through recognizing as
well as selecting the right suppliers considering longterm strategic partnerships to enhance the overall
firm performance [6, 32, 50, 85, 92]. On the other
hand, when the sourcing function is involved in the
strategic initiatives (such as innovation), the buying
firms will not only select the right suppliers, but also
manage them strategically and realize competitive
advantage [2, 21, 50]. Strategic level of sourcing
function is an antecedent in building long-term
strategic relationship with the key suppliers and
increasing the firm performance [32, 85, 92].
To better understand the influence of strategic level
of sourcing function, [21] mentions that the
performance of the sourcing function need to be
measured in terms of its contributions to the firm’s
innovation success. More importantly, the sourcing
professionals require training on strategic elements of
competitive strategy and cross-functional training [6,
21 50]. In other words, the priority of the sourcing
function has moved from cost reduction to overall
performance of the firm – i.e. performance aspects

such as innovation, flexibility, quality, etc. [50, 105].
Therefore, in today’s competitive setting, supplier
relationships should not be based solely on cost
reduction [92]. Alternatively, relationship with
suppliers must go further than mere price negotiation
and should rather focus on other performance
capabilities such as innovation [21].
The importance of strategic level of sourcing function
is not only selecting the right suppliers but also the
appropriate evaluation of the selected key strategic
suppliers to determine greater impact on overall firm
performance to challenge the dynamic market [50,
85]. Accordingly, the strategic level of sourcing
function should systematically understand and
analyze the firm’s business approach, key resources,
market, and the various risks associated with them.
Above all, it is an organized exercise that leads to
sustainable growth as well as increases the firm’s
value [2, 32].
2.3.2
Firm innovativeness
As mentioned earlier, nowadays innovation has
become the most essential driver of sustainable
competitive advantage [3, 7, 39, 63, 65, 86, 97].
Innovative firms will have unique innovativeness
traits that distinguish them from other non-innovative
competitors [37, 52, 67, 76].
Specifically, firm innovativeness relates to the ability
of a firm to exploit new ideas, e.g. by developing
innovative products, and the willingness of the focal
firm to invite other firms to improve their
competences, successively achieving lower costs, and
sustain market performance [3, 37, 39, 67, 76]. This
capability helps the firm to enhance their (1)
knowledge about the changing market condition, (2)
efficiency to identify and exploit opportunities, and
(3) power to respond to the market growth [37, 43,
67, 76]. Thus, innovative firms continuously
demonstrate innovative actions over time [35, 37, 52,
104].
[98] believes that the time of implementation of an
innovation defines the innovativeness of a firm [27].
Furthermore, innovative firms place increased
emphasis on effective knowledge management, cost
reduction, superior quality products and increased
services [39, 76]. Even though a firm employs
innovation earlier than others, it will not always
exhibit similar performance for all other innovations.
Therefore, [24] says that appropriate measures of
innovativeness
should
be
based
on
the
acknowledgment of different innovations. [9] state
that innovative firms always encourage new
concepts, risk-taking activities, value shifts, as well
as innovative techniques to address the needs of the
new market [37, 39, 76]. In addition, [3] indicates
that the innovativeness of a firm is at superior level if
firms involve themselves in an intense interorganizational relationship for innovation process.
Above all, [35] mentions that firm innovativeness is
market condition to achieve sustainable competitive
advantage.
2.3.3
Supplier innovativeness
As mentioned earlier, innovation is no longer the
outcome of a single firm; instead, firms need to
collaborate with their suppliers to be innovative and
create innovative products of the next generation [13,
66, 79, 81, 87]. Supplier innovativeness is the
innovative capability of a supplier to build and
implement new ideas, innovative techniques, as well
as advanced process and investments in new
products, processes and services [13, 45, 66]. [1]
mention that supplier innovativeness is nothing but
organizational learning which continuously allows
the firms to acquire, disseminate and use new
knowledge for collaborative innovation process.
Supplier innovativeness enhances the relationship
capability which allows them together to organize
strategic mechanism to realize innovation and value
[1].
A well-known fact from the above description,
suppliers has now become an important source of
product, process and service innovations. For that
reason, firms should possess the ability to select the
right suppliers who can understand the demands in
the innovation process as well as those who can
willingly work together with them to develop
innovative solutions [4, 18, 51, 77, 79]. On the other
hand, the selected suppliers should be able to help the
buying firm in their pursuit for innovation, especially
by collaborating in activities of new product
development and continuous enhancement of existing
products, processes and services [13, 14, 66, 77, 82].
[41] state that the buying firm should carry out a
systematic assessment of its suppliers so as to gain
additional benefits from the suppliers’ innovativeness
[18, 77]. [11] claims that the degree of supplier
innovativeness could be recognized through
preliminary assessment process and supplier
evaluation process, which in turn, will help in
increasing the innovation capability of the buying
firms [66].
[12] claims that supplier innovativeness evidently
allows the buying firm to strengthen their abilities to
respond appropriately to the needs of the market
which in turn benefits them with higher revenues [4,
13, 23, 43]. Above all, supplier innovativeness, with
no doubt, enhances the firm’s overall performance
along with cost, delivery, flexibility, innovation and
product development [4, 13, 14, 82].
Early supplier involvement
Firms understands the importance and benefits of
involving their supplier early in the design phase is a
strategic decision which leads to continuous
efficiency, superior performance and competitive
advantage [53, 78, 83, 89]. Early supplier
involvement is an innovative collaboration in which

5

the buying firm integrates their suppliers in the early
stages of the new product development as well as
other innovation initiatives [16, 46, 78, 82, 83, 86,
103]. The desire of exercising early integration of
suppliers, as well as the practice of open innovation
among firms, has become prevalent only in the recent
years [80, 82]. This approach encourages both the
buyer and supplier firms to work closely together
along with sharing of knowledge as well as sharing
risks associated with the manufacturing of products,
carrying out processes and delivering services [86,
103, 112]. Furthermore, early supplier involvement
provides suppliers with an opportunity to actively
participate in all key stages of new product
development [103].
Integrating suppliers at a very early stage of product
development can enable firms to not only acquire
assess to the supplier’s design capabilities, but also
enhance their new product development competency
[86, 107]. Moreover, early supplier involvement
enhances the ability to manage the relationships built
on behavior and outcome as well as the risks of
outsourcing [16, 29, 58, 86, 112].
Involving suppliers at an early stage reduces the
cycle time of new product development, while
enhancing the quality of the product as well as cost
performance [46, 78, 83, 99, 103]. Above all, early
supplier involvement provides transparency with
regards to the end product in the initial stages of
product development. It also helps the buying firm to
intimately monitor the activities of their suppliers in
the earlier stages of product development.
The studies presented thus far provide evidence that
there is a substantial as well as growing amount of
research surrounding the operational factors that
represent sourcing innovation; however these studies
do not focus explicitly on sourcing innovation
activities. Therefore this study aspires to initiate
specific research initiatives that build on the
knowledge related to the concept of sourcing
innovation precisely.
3.

METHODOLOGY

This study is an initial effort aiming the exploration
of the key dominant capabilities and observable
practices of sourcing innovation. Accordingly, this
paper adopts a qualitative research approach given its
exploratory nature. While there are various strategies
in qualitative research, this paper utilizes exploratory
study [108]. This approach is specifically relevant for
this paper as it attempts to (1) gain a deeper
understanding by examining first-order factors, (2)
validate the learnt theory as well as (3) extend or
refine theory which has not been deeply explored till
now [19, 31, 40, 102, 108]. This study employs
multiple cases so as to explore and generalize the
guidance to this empirical research. Following [31]
suggestion, this research was developed without any
specific hypotheses so as to maintain theoretical
flexibility.
Based on extensive literature review, an interview
guide was designed focusing on the notion of
sourcing innovation as well as the chosen key
elements as identified in the extant body of literature.
The data for this study were gathered primarily from
five key manufacturing firms in Denmark through
semi-structured interviews and the data were
collected specifically from the focal firms (focal firm
perspective). Certainly, sourcing innovation is an
emerging concept among firms and since this is an
exploratory study; our research has tried first to study
the nature of sourcing innovation among five firms.
This study focused specifically on manufacturing
firms due to the belief that the concept of sourcing
innovation is more relevant for such firms [Eg. 87,
105]. In order to eliminate any industry bias, multiple
industries were sampled. Specifically, the selected
Danish firms were from industrial, food, electrical,
wind turbine, and maritime industry. The various
criteria that were considered while selecting the firms
are presented in Table 3; this table was emailed to the
respondents for confirmation purposes. All the
respondents were selected from the sourcing
department because of their in-depth knowledge
about the role of the sourcing function as well as their
direct involvement in creating not only innovative
products, but also an innovative organization. In
particular, the title of the respondents were chief
procurement officer (Company A), vice president of
strategic sourcing (Company B), global sourcing
director (Company C), global sourcing manager
(Company D) and procurement manager (Company
E). Overall, the interviews helped to gain opinions
and insights from the sourcing executives who play a
key role within sourcing [108].
As a first step of contact, a short one-page summary
along with details of this study was emailed to
experts of the selected firms. After receiving their
consent to participate, the interview guide was
emailed to all the respondents prior to the interview.
The interview guide that was sent to the respondents
prior to the discussion is presented in Appendix 1.
The interview guide focused on the definition of
sourcing innovation from a pragmatic perspective as
well as the key dominant capabilities and observable
practices – strategic level of sourcing function, firm
innovativeness, supplier innovativeness and early
supplier involvement. The questions were adapted
from different empirical research papers (See
Appendix 1). Additional questions about the
respondent’s background and their experience in the
field of sourcing were also asked in the beginning of
each interview. The interviews mostly lasted between

50 and 75 minutes per interview. All interviews were
audio-recorded and then transcribed to guarantee
accuracy and reliability [102, 108].
The data was subsequently transcribed using tables
(see Table 1 and Table 2) to compare the theory and
practice of sourcing innovation as well as to make
appropriate modifications along the way [31].
Additionally, descriptive reports were prepared based
on the recorded interviews for an explorative
analysis. Subsequently, conclusions were made from
the analysis pertaining to the conceptual framework
presented in Figure 1. Finally, the practical
implications of sourcing innovation were formulated
based on the derived conclusions.
4.

PRESENTATION OF FINDINGS

This section presents the interpretation of the five
exploratory cases. As mentioned in the methodology
section, firms from different industry were selected
so as to avoid industry bias. Four of the five selected
companies were globally established except
LAMBDA A/S, which was a European based
company. To examine the prevalence of sourcing
innovation, our research included both large
companies and SMEs. More importantly, since
sourcing innovation centralizes the intense
relationship among firms [87], we made sure that the
buying firm has a strong collaboration with their key
suppliers while selecting them for this exploratory
study. In subsequent subsections, the summary of the
cases are provided. Specifically, each exploratory
case description starts with short background
information and then continues explaining the facts
realized through interviews on the four key elements
of sourcing innovation.
4.1 Company 1: ETA A/S
ETA is a global industrial manufacturer of various
products and services with over 20,000 employees.
The respondent from this company had been with the
company for more than five years. However, he had
over 20 years of experience working within the field
of sourcing. He has been responsible for traditional
procurement including category management,
supplier selection and the global sourcing function.
According to him, there are various challenges that
are very vital today in the field of sourcing such as
supply performance, too many suppliers who are very
small, and the alignment between the business units
(since there are many segments). Therefore, ETA has
dedicated sourcing personnel and they are integrated
as part of the project teams which in turn result in
optimized supply chain performances. Moreover,
ETA involves the sourcing personnel in the firm’s
strategy development process and the performance of
sourcing function is measured in terms of cost
reduction, no. of suppliers, on-time delivery, payment
any formalized training on the elements of strategy
and competitive advantage. Instead, an annual
competence assessment is done to identify whether
there are any gaps. If any gaps are identified, then the
sourcing personnel are given appropriate training.
ETA has many suppliers. ETA requires them to do
everything that is not a core competency of their
company. The respondent also mentioned that “if
firms don’t have the right degree of outsourcing then
they are too vulnerable in terms of fluctuation in the
market”. Therefore, ETA needs suppliers to have
stability in the market. Additionally, he also indicated
that it is always better to involve suppliers while
developing new products considering that they are
the ones who have to live with the design as well as
produce best possible quality at the lowest possible
cost. In fact, the ETA suppliers are extremely willing
to participate during the new product development
and the sooner they are engaged, the more chances of
winning the business. Suppliers are selected based on
the existing supplier list based on segmentation.
Additionally, ETA also performs technical
assessment at the supplier site whenever a new part is
given to them for development. When it comes to
evaluating their suppliers, ETA assesses them based
on quality, strategic fit, cost performance, on-time
deliver performance, etc.
The respondent confirmed that they are trying to
involve their suppliers before the design is frozen;
however, historically the suppliers are integrated only
after the first draft of the design is completed. While
the respondent acknowledged the importance of
having suppliers involved much earlier during the
product development, he also highlighted the various
downsides in involving them early (e.g., if invited
early, suppliers try to lock ETA in with their specific
designs).
ETA is also facing difficulty towards adapting to new
trends from outside as it takes a long time to develop
a new product. In other words, they are generally not
very good at adapting to the changes in the industry.
Additionally, ETA is also not good at working
closely with their supplier, creating value together,
and incorporating their suppliers much earlier in new
product development.
4.2 Company 2: BETA A/S
BETA is a company that provides electrical solutions
for wind turbines with about 1,000 employees. The
respondent was with this company for more than 4
years; he also had over 6 years of experience in the
field of sourcing. But when it comes to the broader
field of supply chain management, his experience
spans almost 20 years. His responsibilities include
supplier selection, supplier relation, negotiation and
category management.
The respondent said that although the sourcing
department is still small in the company, their

7

sourcing function as a whole has improved great in
many aspects in the recent years. The sourcing
personnel in BETA are involved heavily in the firm’s
strategy development process; moreover, as a whole
organization, they are much more focused on
strategic aspects. Meanwhile, the sourcing personnel
works together with other functions (sales and
engineering) on cost initiatives. Performance of the
sourcing function is measured on standard key
performance indicators (KPIs). No specific training
on the elements of strategy and competitive
advantage are given to the sourcing personnel;
instead, they participate in various strategy seminars.
On the other hand, newly employed sourcing
personnel are given one year training focusing on
strategy.
BETA might not have all competences and expertise
in everything; therefore, they need suppliers who
have complementary competences and expertise to
sustain in the market. The respondent also mentioned
that BETA is much better while doing innovation inhouse. However they are still learning to work along
with suppliers on innovation efforts. In addition to
performing a formalized pre-assessment at the
supplier’s venue, BETA also visits and audits the
suppliers’ factories. When it comes to evaluating
their suppliers, BETA first demands their suppliers to
send them a self-assessment report which includes
details pertaining to commercial aspects (e.g., cost,
on-time delivery, etc.). The category manager also
does a two-page supplier performance report that
includes procurement performance measures (PPM),
on-time delivery, past performance in terms of
volume and projected future performance in terms of
volume, among other things. More specifically, the
first page presents the improvements made compared
to the assessments and the second page explains the
agreement on the actions compared to the figures. If
they are out of scope, then some specific actions that
need to be done together with their suppliers will be
included in this report. The respondent mentioned
that this report is very clear and easy to understand.
Additionally, the respondent also said that when it
comes to quality, the suppliers are very much
controlled.
BETA is not much into involving their suppliers
early during product development. According to the
respondent, “the earlier we involve the suppliers, the
more design influence we can have”. Consequently,
BETA is not integrating the suppliers before the
design is frozen. The respondent also mentioned that
there are challenges in involving suppliers early
during the product development such as intellectual
property rights and most of the times suppliers
provide an already known solution.
BETA is much stronger in following new trends and
they are also quite fast in adapting to new ideas. In
reduction.
4.3 Company 3: THETA A/S
THETA is a global wind turbines manufacturing
company with more than 12,800 employees. The
respondent was with the company for over 12 years.
He has been responsible for logistics, procurement,
core competences, identifying innovation partners
and global sourcing activities.
According to the respondent, there is a huge
difference in the field of sourcing within this industry
now compared to 10-15 years ago. For instance,
some years back, OEMs did not have the size to do
everything themselves; so there has been a lot of
supplier involvement. But today, it has developed
much more and has moved to the next level where
they have started to involve strategic suppliers much
earlier in the product design phase and there is an
increased awareness towards the core competences.
THETA highly involves the sourcing function in the
firm’s strategy development process. It is more like a
cross-functional topic that starts from product and
market down to different strategies. The sourcing
department, along with the sales department,
identifies the market opportunities and then the
product is developed for that particular market need.
Mostly, all the market intelligence topics will be
merged into the overall firm strategy. THETA
provides a lot of training to the sourcing personnel
established at different levels. The personnel are
evaluated annually to identify the needs, and then
based on these needs; trainings are allocated to the
personnel. Overall, the training has a huge level of
focus on developing strategic suppliers.
THETA is good at doing innovation in-house;
however they do collaborate with many suppliers as
the suppliers could support to reduce complexity and
overall cost. The suppliers are very often selected
from their established supply base. They focus more
on core competences of the suppliers as well as a cost
reduction perspective while selecting them. After
selecting the supplier, normally, they give a limited
volume of order to the suppliers and subsequently
execute a detailed inspection. Additionally, they also
have a dedicated team which includes a commodity
team and commercial team purchaser, a quality
person, an engineer, and a procurement engineer.
This dedicated team will inspect the new suppliers
and make the decision to shortlist them. The suppliers
are predominantly short listed based on their
capabilities, financial strengths, location, and global
footprints. The agreement with the suppliers is done
in terms of volume and the contracts are done on a
component level. The contract should be more
effective and include all detailed information about
collaboration terms, sharing risks and benefits.
“Suppliers are evaluated based on product or
component or system level” said the respondent.

They are not measured based on value of the
component; instead they are measured based on the
criticality of the component. Moreover, they are
evaluated annually in terms of commercial quality,
delivery performance, etc.
The respondent also said that although it is difficult
to identify system-level suppliers who have high
level of competences for the industry standards; they
still could find new innovative partners and involves
them very early in the design phase. THETA has
already started including some of their suppliers very
early in the design phase. Additionally, the
respondent mentioned that there will be huge
differences in incorporating key suppliers early in the
new product development. Having said this, THETA
was not initially good at involving suppliers before
the design is frozen; but now they do use them much
earlier in the design phase. To enable this early
involvement, they conduct a thorough risk analysis
while selecting key suppliers. Additionally, they also
write a detailed contract based on critical components
and evaluate the suppliers efficiently to avoid any
challenges during the product development.
In general, THETA is very proficient in adapting to
the current changes in the market and also effective
in involving their suppliers early in the design phase.
They have dedicated quality systems to qualify the
suppliers during the selection process. THETA is also
specifically focused towards cost reduction and
increasing lifetime of the product (wind turbines).
4.4 Company 4: ZETA A/S
ZETA is a global maritime company that supplies
life-saving appliances with over 2,000 employees.
The respondent was this company about 8 years.
However, he has worked in the field of sourcing at
different levels for more than 20 years. His
responsibilities include the global sourcing function,
pricing, finding new suppliers, selecting the
suppliers, making agreements with the suppliers, etc.
According to the respondent, total cost is always a
challenge in sourcing; additionally, other factors such
as the business environment, market, customers, and
government policies also present significant
challenge to the sourcing function. The respondent
also acknowledged that sourcing for new
development is also a challenge as they need to get a
better structure to accomplish it. Nevertheless, the
sourcing function has gained more importance in the
firm than earlier for various reasons. For instance,
sourcing is responsible for the total result of the
company, helps in getting the right cost structure as
well as finding the right suppliers. Today, the
company is highly dependent on the suppliers; “if we
don’t have the right suppliers, then we will never
succeed”. In total, sourcing is able to select the right
strategic suppliers and secure the relationship with
these suppliers. Above all, ZETA involves the
sourcing function during the firm’s strategy
training to the sourcing personnel on the elements of
competitive advantage and they are measured on
certain KPIs including cost savings, inbound delivery
performance, quality, etc.
ZETA collaborates with many suppliers; in turn they
need suppliers to provide raw materials as well as
deliver services effectively so as to improve the
performance of sourcing function. Moreover, ZETA
always desires to innovate together with their
suppliers. The selection of their suppliers is based on
pricing, quality and delivery performance. They are
also more concerned about the communication
capabilities of the suppliers; if we cannot
communicate with the suppliers, then it will be very
difficult to work with them appropriately. ZETA does
not follow any formal procedure while selecting their
suppliers; however, to approve a supplier they do
have a formal procedure. As a first step of selection,
they buy a sample from the supplier. Subsequently, a
questionnaire is sent to the supplier concerning their
quality management system. Later, they rate them on
quality performance and if it is satisfactory then the
supplier will be approved. On the other hand, a
formalized report is prepared while evaluating their
suppliers; this evaluation report includes logistics,
quality, pricing, risk factors and corporate social
responsibility. Additionally, the suppliers are
evaluated in terms of cost reductions and innovation.
ZETA involves their supplier early in the design
phase. Additionally, they are also constantly trying to
improve this process. The respondent mentioned that
involving suppliers early depends very much on the
product. Most of the times, ZETA originally have an
idea about what they want to gain from supplier
involvement and then will proceed with involving
suppliers. When they have too many suppliers for the
same product, then the supplier is selected based on
their core capability, quality, cost, performance, and
time to market.
ZETA is very proficient in adapting as well as
responding to the market changes. They always try to
monitor and follow the market changes as well as
constantly attempt to act and react to the market
changes; both in terms of customer and supplier
markets. They do have a very strong management
team that is extremely customer as well as market
focused.
4.5 Company 5: LAMBDA A/S
LAMBDA is one of the Danish food bakeries with
more than 600 employees. The respondent was with
the company for over two years. On the other hand,
he has been working in the baking industry for more
than 20 years and been responsible for logistics,
warehousing, procurement, building huge network of
suppliers and building networks within the
organization.

9

LAMBDA, in general, has their own product
development department that is in charge of creating
new products; they follow a mixture of push and pull
approaches. Pull approach means that the sales and
marketing department set some demands for the
product developers, and then, the developer makes
the product so that the sales and marketing team can
take it to their customers. On the other hand, a push
approach is when the product developers go to the
sales department with newly created products and
request them to take it to the market as well as show
them to their customers. If the product developers
want a new variety of raw material then it is the
sourcing function’s duty to find that product at a
competitive price. Therefore, in turn the sourcing
department plays a key role in finding appropriate
suppliers for the company. They also ensure that
suppliers have all the certificates and documentation
in place.
According to the respondent, most of the companies
within the baking industry are not working with
sourcing on a strategic level; instead they seem to be
focused more on cost reduction. On the other hand,
the responsibility of sourcing, in his opinion, is
building long-term relationships and long-term
strategies. In LAMBDA, the sourcing function is part
of the supply chain group and is to some extent
involved in the firm’s strategy development process.
The main focus of the sourcing function is to get raw
materials cheaper. Therefore, they focus their
supplier selection efforts based on cost benefits.
There is no training provided as the respondent is the
only person in the sourcing department who has all
the authority in selecting suppliers as well as
executing contracts. He does all documentations and
sends it to the central quality department for
approval. LAMBDA measures the performance of
the sourcing function in terms of cost (lower prices).
LAMBDA needs suppliers to supply raw materials at
competitive price that is based on the total cost of
ownership (quality, delivery, correct invoice apart
from the right product). Additionally, they rely on
suppliers to create innovation for the company that
focuses on reduced cost as well as other added
benefits. LAMBDA always gives preference to the
existing suppliers when it comes to selecting
suppliers for new product development; they search
for new suppliers only if the existing suppliers don’t
have the desired product. As a first step, the sourcing
department (procurement manager) checks online for
new suppliers and then contacts them. Later, the
selected supplier completes the supplier questionnaire
and submits all supporting documents and
certification details. Subsequently, the central quality
department approves the supplier. If the supplier has
all approved certificates and has submitted
appropriate supporting documents, then there will be
sourcing begins. For an improved result, the suppliers
are evaluated on a running basis. All the supplier’s
details are taken from their internal database once a
year and will be evaluated in general terms like
delivery time, quality, cost, etc.
According to the respondent, involving too many
suppliers increases the complexity. Accordingly,
LAMBDA reduces the amount of suppliers to create
buying power as well as to create a better
understanding of the company in the eyes of the
supplier. LAMBDA is very open and informative in
telling suppliers that they don’t want to spread their
sourcing. In other words, they clearly convey the
message that the company would like to consolidate
sourcing among less number of suppliers.
LAMBDA is good at in-house innovation. In other
words, the company is proficient at developing new
product, process or service with its own creative
ideas. In regards to supplier involvement, they
involve suppliers whenever there is a need for a
special type of raw material for new product
development. In most cases, they need suppliers to
supply raw materials and give them some
suggestions. On the other hand, they are also
concerned about information security if the supplier
is involved during product development; it gets

complicated if the suppliers are not completely
dedicated to LAMBDA.
LAMBDA is consistently trying to adapt to market
changes; however, they are always one step behind in
the market they compete in. There are many exciting
raw materials outside Denmark and LAMBDA might
not be using them in their products. Therefore, to
cope up with the market changes, LAMBDA sends
their sourcing personnel to different exhibitions to
see how the other markets behave. The respondent
also indicated that there is an issue in the bakery
industry as they cannot just pick good ideas from
outside Denmark and bring it to the Danish market.
This is because LAMBDA is a bigger organization
and would need some good volume (sales volume) to
start up a new product.
5.

KEY FINDINGS

Having summarized the individual exploratory cases
in detail, this section presents a critical analysis
across the five companies. This section starts with the
review of the definition of sourcing innovation
provided by the respondents to come up with a
revised definition based on practice. Later, the
exploration of the various key elements of sourcing
innovation is presented.

Table 1 – Various interpretation of sourcing innovation (Based on interviews)
Company

Various interpretations of sourcing innovation

ETA

“Finding new ways to work with the suppliers to create value. Suppliers have huge potential
that we can tap into if we work with them in the right way.”

BETA

“Development away from category management or just hardcore bargaining to the next level
wherein you realize that you can get benefits in many other ways. Sourcing innovation is in
the field where as a sourcer you are not only a sourcer; instead, you need to know the
product to be able to (1) bind internally in the firm, (2) bind resources from engineering and
production as well as from the supplier side, and (3) bind the resources together to create
right product at lower price.”

THETA

“Sourcing innovation is that you see the synergy between our knowledge and supplier’s
knowledge; we both have competences that give the synergy; we have to identify what our
core competences are and by combining those with suppliers provide the synergy, equal
growth and profits for both parties.”

ZETA

“Doing innovative things that can benefit us. It not just getting a new product, it can also be
about establishing a new process and communication methods. Sourcing innovation cannot
be without suppliers.”

LAMBDA

“It is a creative process between supplier and the customer where they work together to get
to higher level. In many ways it is about better product at lower price. Getting much more

5.1 Sourcing innovation – definition
The interpretations presented in Table 1 are the
summary of the data collected through semistructured interviews from key sourcing experts
within each firm. During the interview, the
respondents were informed about the interpretation of
sourcing innovation that was adopted for this study
based on the literature (Appendix 1). Precisely, they
were asked: “… would you please describe the
concept of sourcing innovation from your company
standpoint?”
The lessons learnt from the interviews (Table 1)
helped in modifying the literary definition of
sourcing innovation that was proposed by [72]: “an
operative engagement or commitment among firms
through which they both can achieve substantial
progress and confidence on each other to be
innovative” [72: 173]. This definition was presented
to the respondents before asking them for their
perspective of sourcing innovation in terms of
practice.
Based on their interpretations, sourcing innovation is
not just a usual routine; instead it is an effective
(active) “synergy among the firms” (see Table 1,
THETA) so as to create “more strategic value” (see
Table 1, LAMBDA). It is more than just supplier
involvement, wherein the firms work much closer
together with their suppliers in “finding new ways to
create value” (see Table 1, ETA). Slowinski et al
(2009) conceptualizes sourcing innovation as an
affair between two firms. Alternatively, our research

forwards that sourcing innovation is not only between
two firms; instead, it is an intense and strategic
collaboration among firms (such as buyers, suppliers,
supply chain, stakeholders, etc.). Now, these
interpretations directed us to revise the definition of
sourcing innovation (in terms of practice) as “an
operative engagement or commitment among firms
(such as buyers, suppliers, supply chain,
stakeholders, etc.) through which they, together, can
find new ways to achieve substantial growth and
effective synergy in each other to be innovative”.
More importantly, it was clear that the sourcing
executives acknowledge sourcing innovation as a
capability that can support their firms in finding
innovative ways to work closer with their suppliers
so as to create new strategic value.
5.2 Sourcing innovation – Key elements
(Dominant capabilities and Observable
practices)
In addition to the literary definition of sourcing
innovation, the respondents were also provided with
the key dominant capabilities and observable
practices that underpin the notion of sourcing
innovation (based on the extant body of literature).
Overall, the respondents acknowledged the
appropriateness of these chosen key elements. They
also conveyed their belief that these could cohesively
reflect an effective practice of sourcing innovation. In
the remainder of this section, we associate these key
elements
across
the
selected
companies.

Table 2 – Interpretations of first-order factors (Based on interviews)
First-order
ETA
BETA
THETA
Factors
Strategic level
of sourcing –
Yes, they are
Yes, they are
Yes, they are
involvement
highly involved
highly involved
highly involved
of sourcing
function
Measured on
cost down, no
Measured on
Measured on
Strategic level
of suppliers, on
usual KPI. More cost saving,
of sourcing –
time delivery,
focused on cost time delivery,
evaluation of
PPM and
and quality
reduction
sourcing
payment
function
charge
Strategic level
of sourcing –
sourcing
personnel are
given training
Firm
innovativeness
– company
adapting to

Annually or if
any gap exists

To some extent

ZETA

LAMBDA

Yes, they are
highly
involved

Yes, they are
highly involved

Measured on
cost saving,
time delivery,
quality, and
lead time

Measured on cost
saving

No specific
training. Only if
gap exists

Annually. Huge
level of focus
on developing
suppliers

Yes

Strong in
adapting to the
market

Very much the
top player in
adapting to the
market

Strong in
adapting to
the market
(More market

No specific
training given.

Firm
innovativeness
– it is better to
develop new
products inhouse without
involving
suppliers
Supplier
innovativeness
– selection of
suppliers

Supplier
innovativeness
– evaluation
of suppliers

Early supplier
involvement
(ESI)

responsive)

No, it is better
to involve
suppliers

Selection done
based on the
supplier list.

Evaluated on
quality,
strategic fit,
cost
performance,
and on-time
delivery
Trying hard to
involve them;
however, only
after the design
is done

Yes it is much
better doing it
inside; still
learning to do
much with the
suppliers

No, it is better
to involve
suppliers

No, it is better
to involve
suppliers

Yes it is much
better doing it
inside

Formal preassessment (inhouse at the
supplier firm).

Formal
procedure
carried out to
select suppliers.

Two levels of
selection:
Approval of
suppliers
which is then
followed by a
formal
procedure.

Central quality
team approves
based on
questionnaire sent
and certificates

Evaluated
based on 2
page supplier
performance
report

They are also
strongly
evaluated on
various aspects

Evaluated on
pricing, on
time delivery,
quality, etc.

Evaluated on
quality, on time
delivery, and cost

Already
started
involving
them before
the design is
done

Only if there is
need

Not much

5.2.1
Strategic level of sourcing function
In general, based on interpretations in Table 2, it is
apparent that the strategic level of sourcing function
can help both buyer and supplier firms to trigger an
intense collaboration. From the interviews, it is also
clear that companies do have “dedicated sourcing
personnel who are integrated as part of the crossfunctional project teams” (e.g. ETA and THETA) and
such cross-functional efforts results in optimized
supply chain performances [6]. The sourcing
personnel of all the five companies are greatly
involved in their firm’s strategy development process
and their contributions are significantly high towards
the firm’s success. Additionally, it is evident that the
sourcing personnel are working together with other
functions on cost reduction initiatives and strategies.
The sourcing function is increasingly being measured
in terms of on-time delivery, quality, cost reduction,
number of suppliers, procurement performance
measures, etc. (Table 2). Notably, it is quite evident
that firms are more focused on the strategic aspects of

Already started
involving them
before the
design is done

the sourcing function. On the other hand, the
respondent from BETA indicated that “category
management should have strategic attention on total
cost savings, quality, as well as bringing in the right
suppliers”.
Additionally, the interviews indicate that the sourcing
personnel are given training annually, or, only, if any
gap exists (e.g. ETA and BETA). On the other hand,
the sourcing personnel in ZETA are given training
consistently. In THETA, the training given to the
sourcing personnel focusses predominantly on
developing suppliers. In case of LAMBDA, there is
only one person in the sourcing department who is
responsible for all the activities. Therefore, it is
apparent that not every company provides formalized
training for their sourcing personnel. Since sourcing
innovation mandates frequent training as well as
cross-functional training [6, 21], its practice could
subsequently lead to an invaluable contribution to the
Firm innovativeness
The concept of firm innovativeness has two
characteristics; one is the firm’s ability to exploit new
ideas, and the second is the willingness of the firm to
adapt to the market changes [37, 39]. BETA,
THETA as well as ZETA are very much on top when
it comes to adapting to the marketing changes (Table
2). On the contrary, ETA and LAMBDA are trying
hard in adapting to the market changes. Generally, it
was clear from the interviews that firms have strong
management teams that can help them to not only
build innovations successfully in-house, but also to
adapt to the industry changes (BETA, THETA and
ZETA).
As mentioned earlier, respondent from ETA said that
“firms need suppliers to do everything that is not core
for the buying company”. ETA, THETA, and ZETA
feel that it is better to involve suppliers in developing
new innovative products (see Table 2). Alternatively,
BETA and LAMBDA feels that it is better to do it inhouse; however, they are still learning to involve
their suppliers (Table 2). In summary, “firms need
suppliers to keep the business running” (ZETA),
“produce best possible quality at the lowest cost”
(ETA), achieve sustainable competitive advantage,
deliver the desired services, and “reduce the
complexity of the product” (THETA). On the other
hand, LAMBDA, in most cases, needs suppliers only
to supply the required raw materials.
5.2.3
Supplier innovativeness
It is also obvious from the interview that sourcing
innovation is “not possible without suppliers”
(ZETA). Therefore, if they do not have the right
degree of sourcing, then the firms are vulnerable to
the fluctuations in the market (ETA). Though firms
have pre-assessments and other formal procedures in
place, the present process for selecting and evaluating
suppliers could be less effective. Specifically, from
the interviews, it is apparent that there is no
standardized formal procedure followed by all
companies in selecting and evaluating suppliers (see
Table 2). For instance, BETA select their suppliers
based on a formal pre-assessment at the supplier
firm; ETA select suppliers from a supplier list;
THETA selects suppliers from established supply
base; ZETA uses a formal procedure to select
suppliers; LAMBDA uses online to check for
suppliers then questionnaire is sent out to the
suppliers. When it comes to evaluating the suppliers,
again, there is no consistent formal process among
the firms in evaluating the supplier performance in
new product development. In general, they are being
evaluated periodically on various aspects like quality,
strategic fit, cost performance, and on-time delivery
performance (see Table 2). Every firm has their own
predefined criteria and follows different formal
procedure in assessing and selecting the right
suppliers. Since sourcing innovation recommends

13

standardized, systematic as well as effective
procedure for selecting and evaluating suppliers [18,
77, 82], to practice sourcing innovation firms will
have to adopt standard procedures to select the right
strategic suppliers as well as sustain their superior
performance.
5.2.4
Early supplier involvement
It was also clear that the suppliers are not only
“willing to participate in innovation activities”
(ETA), but are also actively participating in the
innovation initiatives taken by the buying firm
(THETA and ZETA). Moreover, it is evident from
the interviews that suppliers possess many
competences that the buying firms might not have
(ETA, BETA and THETA); so, it is pertinent to
transfer those competencies into new product
development by actively working together closer
with suppliers. And, sourcing innovation insists firms
to involve their key suppliers in innovation activities
as well to work together in finding new ways to
innovate [69, 87].
It is evident from the interviews that some of the
buying firms have already started integrating their
suppliers early in the design phase itself (THETA and
ZETA). However, some of the buying firms are not
working closely with their suppliers in developing
new products (BETA and LAMBDA) and some firms
really trying hard to involve their suppliers early in
the new product development (ETA). As mentioned
earlier, through sourcing innovation, the buying firms
could involve their suppliers much earlier in the
design phase to create inter-organizational trust and
value together. But some companies seem to be
involving their suppliers only after the design is
frozen. Even though some of the firms are trying to
bring the suppliers before the design is confirmed,
historically they are involving them only after the
first draft of the design is completed (for example,
ETA). The respondent from BETA said that “the
earlier the involvement, the more design influence
that we have from suppliers”. On the other hand, the
respondent from LAMBDA mentioned that “they
involve suppliers only if they need any special type
of raw material”. Additionally, the respondent from
LAMBDA said that involving suppliers might
sometimes complicate the process. In essence, even
though firms realize the importance of involving their
suppliers before the design of the product is frozen;
from these interpretations it is apparent that they
might not be actively integrating their suppliers at an
early stage. Therefore, practicing sourcing innovation
will enable firms to advance the involvement of
suppliers much earlier in the design phase so as to
increase their chances of winning additional market
DISCUSSION

In general, the main intention of this exploratory
study is to compare theory and practice. The results
of our exploratory study recognize the importance of
practicing sourcing innovation among firms. Based
on the literature, our research has considered strategic
level of sourcing, firm innovativeness, supplier
innovativeness, and early supplier involvement as
key elements that underpin the notion of sourcing
innovation. The results of this empirical research
reaffirm the understanding that the relationship
between the chosen key dominant capabilities and
observable practices will lead to effective practice of
sourcing innovation. From Table 2, it is apparent that
companies THETA and ZETA would be superior in
adapting to the market changes, giving adequate
training the sourcing personnel, involving their key
suppliers greater and much earlier during the new
product development, and following, to large extent,
formal procedures in selecting as well as evaluating
them for better performance. Therefore, our research
claims that there could be very high prevalence of
sourcing innovation in these firms. Alternatively,
BETA and ETA are progressing towards achieving
sourcing innovation. Though BETA is very strong in
adapting to the marketing changes and has
constructive assessment for selecting and evaluating
their suppliers, they are not involving their suppliers
earlier in the design phases of new product
development. Additionally, there is no specific
training given to the sourcing personnel. Therefore,
in order to elevate the effective practice of sourcing
innovation, our research recommends BETA to focus
on early supplier involvement and training process
for sourcing personnel. On the other hand, ETA is
trying hard in adapting to the market changes as well
as involving their key suppliers earlier before the
design of the product is frozen. They (ETA) do not
follow any formal procedure while selecting their
suppliers and also they provide annual training to the
sourcing personnel only if there is a gap. For this
reason, our research suggests ETA to perhaps
establish substantial procedure in selecting their
supply as well as advance the training given to the
sourcing personnel for an effective practice of
sourcing innovation. In case of LAMBDA, though
they are to some extent adapting to the market
changes, they are not involving their suppliers much
during the new product development instead they are
using their suppliers only when there is a need.
Therefore, this research recommends LAMBDA to
start involving and working much closer with their
suppliers to ensure an effective practice of sourcing
innovation.
To sum up, our research argues that the proposed key
elements through their association would predict the
effective practice of sourcing innovation. This could
support companies in obtaining extensive strategic

value through the intense as well as early
involvement of their key supplier during the new
product development and to focus on these key
dominant capabilities and observable practices to
strengthen the practice of sourcing innovation.
Certainly, the five case studies have provided
sufficient evidence to confirm that the suggested
positive inter-relationship among them could clearly
indicate the extent of sourcing innovation within
firms.
On the other hand, this research recommends that
firms perceiving sourcing innovation as a dynamic
capability. This approach will offer them the strategic
abilities to develop innovative products, process or
services of next generation and realize competitive
advantage against various dynamic market setting
[42, 100, 105]. Firms will understand the strategically
importance of intense active collaboration with key
suppliers and continuous enhancement of their
resources and capabilities to explore innovative value
along with their supply chain partners [22, 30, 100].
Above all, firms that view sourcing innovation as a
dynamic capability would be superior in various
aspects
such
as
sensing,
seizing
and
transforming/reconfiguring
capabilities,
opportunities, strategic supplier integration abilities
and competence to innovate products of next
generation as well as to achieve innovative
knowledge for organization learning [56, 94, 100,
105, 110].
7.

CONTRIBUTION AND IMPLICATION

As sourcing innovation presents many challenges to
organizations, this research not only conceptualizes
the notion in terms of practice but also identifies
dominant capabilities and observable practices to
operationalize it. This research paper endorses the
conceptual definition as well as the four key elements
of sourcing innovation, more from a practical
perspective and also explores the sourcing innovation
concept by integrating theory and practice, and, in
doing so, provide clarity on the notion of sourcing
innovation. Additionally, our research informs firms
to practice sourcing innovation from this dynamic
capability perspective so that they could innovate
more
efficiently
through
intense
strategic
collaboration with their supply chain partners. This
exploratory study indeed substantiates the prevalence
of sourcing innovation among firms. Further, the
insights gained from the interviews show that firms
are not practicing it effectively and do not have a true
strategy in place. This research emphasizes that
organizations should perceive sourcing innovation as
a dynamic capability and practice it through effective
strategic collaboration which should predominantly
include the integration of suppliers to a greater extent
before the design is frozen. Above all, this form of
well as sustainable competitive advantage [87, 105].
In general, the implications of this research are
twofold. From a theoretical perspective, our paper
contributes to sourcing innovation research by
demonstrating the significance of strategic
collaboration
among firms. The pragmatic
evidence enhances the theoretical definition of
sourcing innovation from practical perspective and
supports that the chosen four key elements will
clearly signal as well as strengthen the practice of
sourcing innovation. Sourcing innovation, of course,
is not a new concept but an emerging concept.
Therefore, this research would be a significant
contribution by bringing other related concepts, for
instance outsourcing innovation, innovative sourcing
etc., together under one umbrella ‘sourcing
innovation’. Based on this groundwork, other
researchers could be able to expand or refine it
depending on their perspective. From a managerial
perspective, this paper provides constructive
knowledge for practitioners to observe sourcing
innovation as a dynamic capability. Firms by
recognizing sourcing innovation as a dynamic
capability would be able to equip their resources and
competences in line with the current dynamic market
environment. More importantly, perceiving sourcing
innovation as a dynamic capability is critical in
achieving continuous innovation and sustainable
competitive advantage. Specifically, from a buyer
perspective, this research clearly highlights how
firms could increase the overall performance by
strategically collaborating as well as innovating along
with their supply base. In other words, our research
findings recommend that a focus on these key
elements (dominant capabilities and observable
practices) and the strategic alignment among them
will lead to effective practice of sourcing innovation,
and, in turn, achieving sustainable competitive
advantage.
8.

CONCLUSION, LIMITATION AND
FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Sourcing innovation is a core activity in the field of
supply chain management. It does not concentrate
only on cost reduction; instead, it is more likely a
dynamic capability that helps firms to achieve
sustainable competitive advantage. It also helps in
achieving the strategic objective of the firms through
extensively collaborating with their key supply chain
partners in all innovation activities. Sourcing
innovation as a dynamic capability helps firms to
recognize enhanced ways to innovate by exploiting
the resources and capabilities of their suppliers as
well as overcome challenges in selecting and
managing their suppliers so as to involve them
effectively in the innovation process [22, 66, 81, 87].
In particular, sourcing innovation provides firms with

15

an effective strategy to identify right suppliers and
evaluate them on the components of competitive
advantage.
The interviews did confirm that firms are practicing
sourcing innovation; however, they are not
effectively practicing the same. For example, not all
five case companies are giving adequate training to
the sourcing personnel on the elements of
competitive advantage instead they are giving
training only when there is a new update or need or
annually. Sourcing innovation insists on adequate
training for the sourcing personnel to understand the
firm’s strategy and needs of the current dynamic
market setting. They are not following any
formalized procedures while selecting their suppliers
and do not have any standardized procedure in
evaluating the performance of their suppliers. And,
when it comes to early supplier involvement, they all
are aware of early supplier involvement and its
positive impact. However, not all companies are
involving their suppliers early in the development
process. On the other hand, two of the five firms are
trying hard to implement the process of early
involvement of their suppliers; another two firms of
the five are already involving their suppliers even
before the design is frozen. Wherein, one of the five
companies is involving their supplier if ONLY there
is a need. Therefore this research is conveying to all
firms the importance of early supplier involvement
which will lead to superior firm performance. In
other words, this research showcases that early
supplier involvement will not only help cost
reduction, but will also results in the overall growth
of the company and achieving sustainable
competitive advantage.
With respect to the practical definition, a theoretical
description was provided in the qualitative
questionnaire. The participating executives were
asked about it’s the professional perspective about
the definition of sourcing innovation. Based on the
inputs received, the theoretical definition of sourcing
innovation was improvised. The resulting practical
definition of sourcing innovation is that it is “an
operative engagement or commitment among firms
(such as buyers, suppliers, supply chain,
stakeholders, etc.) through which they, together, can
find new ways to achieve substantial growth and
effective synergy in each other to be innovative”.
In spite of significant contributions, our research does
have limitations that could provide scope for future
research on sourcing innovation. First, the companies
selected for our research are all within the context of
Danish manufacturing firms. Therefore, this research
could be extended by including other Nordic and
European manufacturing firms (including the hi-tech
and automotive industries). Second, all the
respondents were from the sourcing department of
the focal firms. Accordingly, this research could be
sourcing innovation from buyer as well as supplier
perspective. Third, the research could be further
developed with additional companies (as of now five
companies) and analyzed from other theoretical
aspects. Additionally, it would be exciting to expand
the results of this research into hypotheses, which
could be measured through a survey to improve the
reliability and validity of the proposed framework. In
spite of these limitations, this research would make
significant contribution to extant research on
sourcing innovation.
To conclude, this research paper, based on the
exploratory study, acknowledges strategic level of
sourcing function, firm innovativeness, supplier
innovativeness, and early supplier involvement as
dominant capabilities and observable practices that
would underpin the complex concept of sourcing
innovation. Firms might not be utilizing these
acknowledged dominant capabilities and observable
practices and therefore, this research paper
recommends firms to actively exploit these
acknowledged dominant capabilities and observable
practices to promote the effective practice of sourcing
innovation which includes intense strategic
collaboration, continuous innovation and sustainable
competitive advantage. Having said this, further
exploration and active discussion on this topic
sourcing innovation would result in greater benefits
for firms.

9.
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
