


face more rigorous government regulations, North American counterparts are more profit
driven. Because the targeted remanufacturers of this research are U.S. based, this paper is
more focused on providing economical competitive advantage, such as matching supply
with demand to maximize profit, and less on governmental regulation factors or environmental issues.
The fluctuations of both supply and demand sides are the most critical issues facing
industry today. Many other remanufacturing topics, such as inventory management,
are designed to either isolate or mitigate these fluctuations. In a survey by Hammond
et al. [8], automotive part remanufacturers considered that parts availability was the
number one difficulty for their operation (43% of them), and 41.2% of them used availability of parts as the main criterion to decide whether or not to remanufacture a given
product. Marx-G?mez et al. [9] and Guide et al. [10] stated that the uncertainty in time
and amount was the single most important factor that influences remanufacturing system planning. Guide et al. [3] listed seven major problems that remanufacturing systems faced today, and three of them were related to this problem. Uncertainty from
supply side (returned products) is the most crucial characteristic of remanufacturing
problems, and it distinguishes remanufacturing from traditional manufacturing systems.
Unlike traditional manufacturers, remanufacturers usually have less or no direct control
of the returned parts. Figure 1 illustrates an example of variations in both supply and
demand sides. From a remanufacturer? s perspective, supply is the volume of returned
used products, and demand is how many remanufactured products are desired. The
overlapping area denotes remanufacturable quantity when delays in inventory, remanufacturing time, and other factors are neglected. As the figure shows, remanufacturing
operations are essentially matching processes which intend to maximize the overlapping region under demand and supply curves, and in order to match, forecasts of both
supply and demand curves are necessary. Moreover, in addition to the variations in
quantity and arrival times, quality variation is equally important since returned products can have a wide range of conditions, but finished products usually need to meet
the same quality specification. This poses a unique problem which traditional manufacturing systems do not encounter, so new techniques are needed to predict and actively
change the shape of both supply and demand curves. Some researches take incentives,
such as discount and advertisements, into account to optimize the overall remanufacturable volume [11]. Our study is more focused on the prediction of the supply curve
(see Figure 1).
There exists a spectrum of remanufacturing scenarios which have very different types
of return characteristics. For example, the return process of leased printer is very


predictable since the return date and/or quality are predefined by the leasing contracts.
However, the return characteristics of many fashionable goods and consumer electronics are much more random since the sales of the items, usage pattern, and customer return behavior are all fairly unpredictable. Because of this variation in predictability,
different forecasting approaches are required for different business settings. This paper
targets the recently developed electrical vehicle (EV) battery return applications. The
urgency and importance of EV battery remanufacturing is because of limited and costly
resources, the modular nature of lithium batteries, and potential resale market. Current
lithium ion (Li-ion) battery-powered vehicles, such as Chevy Volt and Nissan Leaf,
whose batteries are warranted for 8? 10 years or 100,000? 150,000 miles, are likely to fail
before the expected life of the vehicles. The returned battery may still have significant
residual value. The cost of Li-ion battery is still very high, usually at $1,000? $1,200 per
kWh. Therefore, remanufacturing has great potential to dramatically reduce the total
life-cycle costs of Li-ion batteries [12,13]. Industries also propose different types of purchase/warranty schemes in order to allow customers to have operational batteries for
the entire vehicle lifespan. That is, customers are now able to purchase not only a single battery pack with the EV but also the warranty of battery use-time, or the combination of them. In this type of business scenario, broken or degraded batteries can be
returned or traded in to dealers or battery collectors and be replaced with a new battery
before the predefined total use-time expires. The new batteries can then be made with
components from returned batteries. This creates strong incentives for customers to return and also for manufacturers to remanufacture. Since this business scenario is completely new, the goal of this research is to develop a long-term forecasting method to
remanufacturers and related suppliers to assist their operational decisions.
The challenges for forecasting of product returns are mainly from two sources: lack
of quality/credible data and unproven assumptions. There is no or very limited historical data since this type of remanufacturing business scenario is never before seen in
the industry and data collecting is also limited or of low accuracy/credibility in similar
fields. These challenges seriously limit the type of forecasting techniques we can implement. With these constraints, we propose to build a physical model-based forecasting
method instead of traditional data-driven methods which heavily rely on data quality
and sophisticated statistical models.
The objective of this research is to provide a methodology to forecast both quantity
and quality of returned products, such as EV batteries, based on previous/expert knowledge on indirect information rather than direct historical data. The rest of the paper is
organized as follows. Literature review reviews previous literature regarding remanufacturing return forecasting. Forecasting of product return quantity presents the methodology and main factors for quantity forecasting of product returns, and Quality
forecasting of returned products is the formulation for quality forecasting and numerical cases. The final section summarizes this research work and points out possible future research directions.

Literature review
Although sale forecasting has been studied for many decades, there are few scientific
papers regarding return item forecasting for remanufacturers, and majority of them are

and production planning [14]. For some scenarios, simple classical forecasting techniques, such as moving average and exponential smoothing, are sufficient [15]. However, often, there are more valuable information that people can take advantage of, and
a variety of forecast outputs are required for different situations [16]. Therefore, specific techniques are developed to tailor to those specific needs. In some cases, periodical information, such as monthly volume, is available and the need is to predict in the
future volume [17]. In other cases, historical return dates are available and other characteristics, such as return lead times, are predicted. Kelle and Silver [18] developed four
different forecasting methods for expected value and variance of return lead times of
containers. Goh and Varaprasad [19] used a transfer function model which included
factors, such as previous returns, sales, and time lag, to predict the timing and quantity
of returns of Coca-Cola bottles. Toktay et al. [20] developed a Bayesian estimationbased distributed lag model which used newly collected data to update estimated parameters. As listed above, the majority of existing studies use statistics-based method
for prediction with historical data.
Other types of forecasting methods including previous knowledge, simulation, or
known sub-models are often used. Marx-Gomez et al. [9] combined simulation and
fuzzy logic models to forecast the quantities and timing of returns of photocopier.
Simulation was used to obtain sales, failures, usage intensity, return quotas, and other
so-called impact factors. Then, fuzzy controller was used to combine these impact factors and give one-period prognosis and neuro-fuzzy network was used to provide
multi-period prognosis. Similarly, Hanafi et al. [21] used fuzzy-colored petri nets to
combine different sub-models, such as technology development, consumer demands,
and product reliability to forecast returns at different locations over a specific time
period. For others, non-parametric models are more suitable. For example, Monte
Carlo simulation is employed to estimate CRT television sales. The gap between existing literature and our current need is that the above methods are used for prognosis
and for relatively short-term prediction but not for lifespan planning of the business or
facility. Furthermore, the existing literature has not addressed much on the quality variation of returned products which is critical for battery remanufacturing. To fill the gap
in the existing literature, this paper develops a new forecasting tool for end-of-life
product returns in terms of timing, quantity, and quality to support the remanufacturing strategic planning and decision making.

Forecasting of product return quantity
Quantity forecasts provide information of how many product return a remanufacturer expects to obtain at a future time. However, unlike most forecasts which only deal with onetime customer decision, such as buying or not buying, returning is determined by a series
of cascaded events, i.e., product purchase decision, product usage, and product return decision. In this section, a new method is presented for predicting product returns in terms
of quantity only. This is critical to determine the availability of remanufacturable products. The key to the new method is to utilize an effective characterization of three main
influence factors? sales, life expectancy, and return behavior? to facilitate an accurate



Sub-models for influence factors
Sales distribution, S(t)

Sales forecasting has been studied for many decades, and each manufacturer or third
party consultant usually has its own forecasting models. Moreover, it is common in industry practice that non-equation form of modeling is used, and people tend to focus
more on market research perspective of the forecast. Techniques, such as concept test,
focus groups, perceptual mapping, conjoint analysis, and consumer clinics, are more
often seen in order to have a better understanding of the customers? preference and to
adjust future plans. For example, the information acceleration (IA) methods are used
for GM? s new electric vehicle sales prediction [22]. On the other hand, academic researchers are still interested in more mathematics-orientated approaches because they
can provide a more direct relationship among different influential factors. For this reason, this paper provides both analytical and numerical methods in order to accommodate current industry practice.
For analytical-based forecasts, there are generally two categories: aggregated and
disaggregated models. For the aggregated or top-down approaches, only the cumulated
behavior of a group of people is studied. On the other hand, disaggregated or bottomup models study individual decision makers that underlie market demand or supply
and integrate them. Although the emphasis in forecasting and econometrics has generally shifted from aggregated to disaggregated models in the past decades, most forecasting models people use in industry today are still of aggregated form simply due to the
difficulty and expense of collecting data on individual consumers. Out of all aggregated
models, Bass diffusion model is the most often used [23].
Diffusion of products or innovation is the theory that seeks to explain how, why, and
at what rate a new idea spreads through societies. The parameter that characterizes this
process is called the rate of adoption, and it is defined as the relative speed in which
members of a social system adopt an innovation. This rate is usually measured by the
length of time required for a certain percentage of the members to adopt. Customers
can be divided into many categories, such as innovators, early adopters, early majority,
late majority, and laggards. Groups are different in how they perceive different
innovation factors, such as relative advantage, compatibility, and complexity of the
product. Bass diffusion model is chosen because it has all the essentials of diffusion
models yet is the most simplified and intuitive version. In this model, only two customer groups, early adopters and followers, are considered. The sales only include the
originally manufactured products and the remanufactured products are only used for
warranty repair but not for original sale.
Mathematically, we use the following differential equation to represent the Bass
diffusion
f

or imitator factors in the original model. Sales volume at time t, S(t), is the rate of
change of installed base f(t) multiplied by the market potential, m, and has the form of

In real practice, p and q are set equal since early adopters usually act much quicker
than followers. The choice of p and q depends on many other social factors and industry [24].
Bass diffusion model is a generalized form of other more commonly used ? s-curve?
functions. When q =0, it reduces to standard exponential distribution with λ = p. When
p = 0, it reduces to logistic distribution. Bass diffusion model is also a special case of
the Gamma/shifted Gompertz distribution.
Product breakdown distribution, B(t)

Besides sale information, another essential influencing factor for battery return forecasting is battery life expectancy or the degree of quality degradation during the usage
stage. Currently, battery condition monitoring typically refers to the evaluation of battery state of charge (SOC), or the state of health (SOH). SOC is defined as the amount
of remaining charge in a battery before a recharge is required, and SOH is the potential
chargeable capacity of a battery compared to the original unused one. For electric vehicle batteries, consumer usually does not return when the battery is completely dead
but rather until certain degradation criteria are reached, such as SOC drops below
75% ~85%. Therefore, the return time prediction is usually to predict the time length
that a battery can last until certain manufacturer predefined threshold is reached.
The conventional approach for life expectancy prediction is to model product condition or degradation by an appropriately chosen random process, and the occurrence of
failure or reaching of certain threshold is modeled by a Poisson process. Weibull distribution is chosen for this study because its failure rate function is only current state
dependent. The system condition, or degradation state, is modeled by a Brownian motion with positive drift. Under this assumption, the time to failure corresponds to the
first passage time of the Brownian motion and follows an inverse Gaussian distribution.
Weibull distribution is well studied for reliability engineering, and reference can be
found in many textbooks (i.e., [25]).
Weibull distribution is one of the solutions that assume the degradation process is
deterministic. The probability density function g(t), the hazard function h(t), and cumulative distribution function G(t) of Weibull distribution are:

Here, the breakdown function B(t) is exactly the probability density function, i.e.,
B(t) = g(t) [24]. Weibull distribution is a very versatile reliability distribution and widely
used in many reliability engineering applications. By changing the shape parameter, the
failure rate h(t) can be changed directly. It can be increasing, constant, or decreasing
over time. Piecewise curve fitting is commonly used to model the classic ? bell curve? for
failure rate [26,27].
Customer return function, C(t)

Customer return behavior is the third influencing factor that needs to be considered in
the forecasting model. The warning indicator of a battery failure is usually signaled on
the dashboard, very similar to maintenance reminder signals. Also similar to the maintenance behavior, people usually do not bring back the vehicle for battery treatments
immediately when they see the warning signal. This is probably due to the fact that the
vehicle is still perfectly drivable and usually no noticeable changes are detected. Another reason is that SOC or SOH aspects of the battery usually degrade very gradually
over a period of years without noticeable abrupt changes.
To the authors? knowledge, people do not return immediately, and sometimes the
time delay between product failure and the return action can be as long as half a
year or more. The return function is usually heavily skewed to the left as illustrated in Figure 2. This long-tailed distribution indicates that the majority of people
will return damaged or unwanted product in a short period of time. However, there
are also a considerable amount of people who will return after a relatively long period
of time. This kind of characteristics can be modeled by inverse Gaussian functions
due to its skewness, positive support, and relatively easy expression (see Figure 2).
Choosing inverse Gaussian is also because its flexibility in modeling the following
three characteristics: (1) the majority of people return within certain time period, (2)
only a small portion of them return whenever they found convenient, and (3) the rest



Inverse Gaussian functions have the general probability distribution function of


where j >0 is the mean and i >0 is the shape parameter. C(t) represents the probability
that the customer returns the battery t time units after its failure.
Although there are many other factors that may influence the quantity and quality of
the returned products such as government regulations, they are either not appropriate
for the EV battery return in North America or not proven to have significant influence
on return quantity or quality. Therefore, the three main factors listed above are the
focus in this study.
Return quantity forecasting in continuous case

As illustrated in Figure 3, the return quantity at any point in time, such as at point R,
is the summation of different sale quantity and product life expectancy combination.
That is, returned product at R may be purchased at time S1 and used for B1 years, or
purchased at time S2 and used for B2 years, and so on.
One way to characterize the relationship of these three influential factors is to use
convolution. Convolution for two continuous functions f(t) and g(t) is defined as


where R(t) denotes the return quantity at time t, S(t) is the probability function of sales
quantity, B(t) is the probability function of breakdown time, and C(t) is the probability
function of customer return. Note that B(t) and C(t) may not be normalized to 1. The



threshold during the lifespan of an electric vehicle. The integration of C(t) is less than
1 because not all failed batteries are returned. Some customers may choose not to return or return to third party collectors.
However, due to the complexity of the functions S(t), B(t), and C(t), there is no
closed-form solution for the convolution. Because only a finite range is needed, these
functions can be approximated over this desired range by some polynomial functions.
The coefficients of the polynomial are chosen such that the weighted error between
the approximation and original function is minimized in a least squares sense. For
example,
θ

Return quantity forecasting in discrete form

As mentioned, the majority of forecasting models used in industry are not analytical
based but are most likely produced and derived from different forms of marketing researches. Periodical, such as monthly or yearly, data instead of equation form of S(t), B
(t), and C(t) are provided. The advantage of using a discrete form is that the raw data
form from reliability tests can be used directly without fitting into a model first. Similar
as continuous convolution, a discrete form of convolution can be defined as


where both f[n] and g[n] have finite positive support, and l is a scale factor which is
related to number of samples for both f[n] and g[n] and is used for normalization. Due
to the simplicity of discrete convolution computation, many continuous functions are
first discretized then are taken convolution in discrete domain. In this way, no symbolic
integral of continuous functions is needed.
Numerical examples

This section uses a numerical example to demonstrate the modeling procedure. The
sales volume of battery packs are the same as the sales volume of the electric vehicles.
A typical EV model usually has a life of 3 ~ 4 years. Hence, it is reasonable to assume
95% of the Bass diffusion function to be in the range of [0, 4]. Substituting p =0.08,
q =2, and m =1 into Equation 3, we obtain S(t) and its polynomial approximation
~
S

The result is shown in Figure 4.
Monte Carlo simulation verification

Another way to predict the quantity of returned product is using Monte Carlo simulation. Monte Carlo simulation is a family of computational algorithms that rely on
repeated random sampling in order to obtain the final results. Assume there total customer to be 100,000, so 100,000 samples will be used. For each sample, its sale date, expected product life, and customer returns are generated according to the functions S(t),
B(t), and C(t), respectively. For sales date, it follows Bass diffusion model as in previous
sections. Technically speaking, it is not strictly a probability distribution since the integration of the function may not add up to 1. Therefore, normalization is needed before
sampling. For each sample, the deterministic calculation is then calculated:

2.5
Sales, S(t)
Breakdown, B(t)
Consumer Behavior, C(t)
Return, R(t)

Distributions

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

2

4

6
Time (Years)

Figure 4 Return quantity forecasts.

8


Return date ?



sale date ? product life ? return delay

For aggregation, histogram is used to obtain the distribution of sale date, product life,
return delay, and return date, as illustrated in Figure 5.
To compare the results from Monte Carlo simulation with analytical results, the
difference between two curves is measured by f-divergence method. One of the fdivergence methods, KL-divergence value, is 0.028, and Hellinger distance is 0.035
which are all much less than 1. This indicates the results obtained by both methods
are very close to each other.
Properties of predicted return function

Because of convolution and the general shapes of S(t), B(t), and C(t), the convolution
operation acts like a weighted moving average. This moving average can also be viewed
as a ? low-pass? finite impulse response filter. This means that only ? low frequency? information will be preserved, and ? high frequency? information will be eliminated by convolution. Here, ? frequency? of a function roughly means how many times a function varies
in a given time interval. By taking Laplace transform in the continuous case or Ztransform in the discrete case, it can be shown that distributions used by S(t), B(t), and
C(t) are essentially low-pass filters [28]. As a result, R(t) is smoothed by each distribution, and any small ? noises? of S(t), B(t), or C(t) will be reduced. Figure 6 demonstrates
a case where ? seasonality noise? (a sine function), or ? high frequency? function, is added
to the sales function, S(t). Sine function is chosen because it contains only a single
frequency.


where t is in radian. Please note that the sine function has much higher frequency than
the original function. Also note that after the sine function is added the mean, variance
and the area under the curve of S(t) is preserved. The resulting function R(t) is exactly
the same before and after adding this ? seasonality noise? component (see Figure 6). Due
5000

Analytical results
Monte Carlo simulated results
0.5
4000

B(t)

Distributions

0.4

3000

R(t)

0.3

2000
0.2

Monte Carlo Simulation

S(t)

1000
0.1

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

0
12


Page 12 of 18

0.7
Sales S(t)
Return R(t)
Sales S(t) with Noise
Return R(t) with Noise

0.6

Distributions

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time (Years)

Figure 6 Adding high frequency noise to S(t) results in overlapping R(t)s.

to this smoothing effect, R(t) is not sensitive to ? high-frequency? changes in S(t), B(t), or
C(t).

Quality forecasting of returned products
Besides the quantity of the returned products, quality of them is another critical information that production planners would like to know beforehand for remanufacturing
planning. In this study, the return product quality is defined as the remaining useful life
(RUL) of the unbroken parts of a returned product. A typical EV battery pack usually
consists of hundreds of battery cells. When the performance measurement of a battery
pack, such as SOC or capacity, drops below certain threshold, only one or a few cells
fails or degrades to unacceptable condition while the majority of the cells are still in
good or reasonable quality. Because not all the cells degrade at the same rate, it is critical to estimate the RUL of good cells, so the remaining value can be assessed. RUL is
essentially a conditional probability distribution which determines how long it takes to
reach certain threshold given that the battery cells have already survived certain among
of time (the time for the battery pack reaching the threshold). In order to express the
quality information along with the quantity information, three-dimensional plots are
used. The x-axis represents the battery return date, the y-axis is the expected quality
indicated by remaining life, and z-axis is the quantity distribution.
Quality distribution, Q(t, x)

Remaining useful life (RUL) is defined as a conditional random variable Xt = T − t when
T > t, where t is the time where a part has survived so far and T is the time to failure.
The conditional reliability function Rt(t) contains all the information required for RUL.
The reliability function is defined as
?

where x = T − t, and f(t), F(t), and h(t) are time to failure probability density function
(pdf ), cumulative distribution function (cdf), and hazard rate functions defined in
Equations 9? 11. The conditional distribution becomes.

For each breakdown time, t, there is a RUL distribution associated with it which gives
the third dimension to the final plot.
Convolution

It is assumed that the quality is uniform when the product is out of the factory
or at the time of purchase, so the third dimension of S(t) is invariant. So we have
S(t, x) = S(t). Similarly, because consumer? s behavior will not be affected by the
RUL of returned battery, their return behavior would not be affected by return time
either, i.e., C(t, x) = C(t). Because of this invariance in both S(t, x) and C(t, x), the convolution is only performed in one dimension, and it is independent of the ? quality? dimension. That means
Z
Quality distribution, Q(t, x)

This distribution is determined by two factors, the product breakdown time t and RUL
x. The relationship is given by Q(t, x) in Equation 23 for this example. It can be seen
that when the shorter the product usage time t is, the longer the expected RUL x is, as
in Figure 8. Because the mode of breakdown function Q(t, x) along the t direction is


Customer return distribution, C(t, x)

Similar with the sales function, the customer return behavior function is also constant
along the quality axis since return behavior would not alter the quality of the product
itself. That is, C(t, x) = C(t), which is shown in Figure 9.
Return distribution, R(t, x)

The final returned product quantity and quality plot is shown in Figure 10. The cross
section of the plot along the time direction at x = 0 is the same as the R(t) from
Numerical examples.
From this plot, it can be shown that after return date (t) passes a certain time
(9 years), or the sum of peak sales date (around 2 years) plus peak breakdown
time (around 7 years), the returned products are largely in very low quality (x <1
year). This gives a rough time frame when a returned product is economical to be
remanufactured. Some other end-of-life treatment, such as recycling or proper disposal, may be employed after certain time.
Verification with Monte Carlo simulation

For this illustrative example, one million samples are used for each of the random
input generation. Generation of the sale dates, expected product life, and customer
return behavior is the same as in Monte Carlo simulation verification. The RUL of
returned products is generated by randomly drawing samples from Q(t, x) where
t of each sample is determined by the expected product life samples. Therefore,
whenever a sample is generated, the Q(t, x) distribution needs to be recalculated.

Figure 10 Return quantity and quality distribution, side view and top view.

Each sample has two components, the return date and return quality. Return date is
calculated in the exact same way as in Monte Carlo simulation verification. The return
quality is sampled directly from Q(t, x) as shown in previous subsection. The distribution is obtained by using two-dimensional histogram or other scientific volume imaging
techniques. The simulation results shown in Figure 11 agree well with R(t, x) obtained
using analytical convolution-based approach.

Conclusions and future work
This research provides a methodology to forecast long-term trend of both quantity and
quality of product returns, or the supply of a remanufacturing system, by modeling

Figure 11 Monte Carlo for returned product quantity and quality.

and their combinatory formulation in a forecasting method. To meet the emerging
needs of decision support in the remanufacturing industry, reliable forecasting of supply can help determine a reasonable estimate of used products attainable under a given
set of conditions and further assist decision makings in remanufacturing operations.
The effectiveness and accuracy of the forecasting model developed in this paper is verified and validated with simulations.
Generally, the typical goals of strategic forecasting are threefold: (1) estimate opportunity and outcome for future business actives, (2) find what influence and how to influence outcome, and (3) judge the potential risks associated with such business
actives. The first two are covered by this research. The model developed in this paper
only provides the most likely outcome based on a single set of assumptions, so potential risks are more difficult to discovery. Future works may include sensitivity analysis,
scenario analysis, and different assumption management techniques.
