

plasma transformed arc (PTA), laser cladding (LC), bead welding, etc. are used as a material deposition techniques. All these techniques have advantages and disadvantages connected with quality and production cost. Out of them PTA cladding and laser cladding,
are extensively used to deposit materials due to its key ability to bond many materials together, it becomes a famous technology for recovering parts [5]. A common feature to
these processes is that both use powdered hardfacing material. The hardfacing materials
such as cobalt based alloys (strengthened by carbides), nickel-chrome based alloys, etc.
are used in petroleum refinery and automobile equipments are heat resistant materials
not much has been done to evaluate the surface topography after deposition [6]. Therefore, for this phase good machinabilty is an important aspect of deposit coating.
Traditionally, grinding process is applied to finish the top-surface of the deposited
layer specially required for mating surfaces, i.e., valve face, crankshafts, etc. The major
disadvantages associated with the conventional surface finishing processes are (i) it suffers from low finishing rate, high tool wear, and high probability of surface damage due
to existence of point forces on the workpiece surface [7, 8], (ii) the hardness of the
workpiece surface act as a determining factor and even sometimes such materials are
very difficult-to-machine using conventional methods [9], (iii) it suffers from low geometrical accuracy, which is almost impossible to attain up to the desire level for such
advance materials by conventional methods [10, 11]. Therefore, there is a need for an
alternate process which has the capability of nano-level finishing at higher finishing
rate. The process is expected to be effective for finishing intricate external profiles and
advanced materials. In the recent years, electrochemical honing (ECH) is emerging as a
prominent finishing technique for both internal and external surfaces [12, 13].
Till date no work has been reported on finishing of PTA clad layers using ECH
process. This paper presented a comparison study of recovered part working surface
using micro-grinding and ECH process, to better summarize the process capabilities of
these processes over deposited material. The aim of this work was to upgrade and recover the discarded engine valves to like-new performance. The surface properties,
such as microstructure, surface roughness and the design properties such as geometrical accuracy and profile dimensions have been investigated.

Methods
For the present study, discarded engine valves were collected and prepared for PTA
cladding as shown in Fig. 1a. After cladding, it is observed that the average thickness of

Fig. 1 a A view of the faying faces of valve head prepared for PTA cladding; b A view of PTA clad engine

Page 3 of 12

Table 1 Chemical composition of the engine valve face
Element

C

Cr

Mn

Mo

Si

S

P

Fe

Weight (%)

0.36

12

0.78

1.05

1.95

0.03

0.043

balanced

the deposited cladding was around 2 mm. Therefore, to meet the original dimensions and
geometry of the processed part a post machining process is required. Figure 1b describes
a photographic view of engine valves prior to finishing. Table 1 present the chemical composition of working surface of valve after PTA cladding that were observed through a
BAIRD made atomic absorption spectroscopy instrument. The average surface roughness
of PTA cladding before grinding was lying between 30 and 40 μm.
Before starting the experimental study to investigate the optimum input process parameters in respect of the monitored outputs, the workpieces were required a rough
machining process (grinding). It is observed from the Fig. 1b that deposited material
using PTA process gives a rough and irregular shape which cannot be fitted directly in
the precision process such as micro-grinding and ECH process due to the constraints
of the high processing time and tooling cost. Therefore, recovered workpieces are first
passed through a rough grinding process to generate a layout of the valve face geometry. Figure 2 shows the photographic view of the engine valve face after rough
grinding.

Study on ECH of rebuild valve face
A study on the ECH of the working surface of the valves head face made of
X40CrSiMo10-2 alloy steel using PTA cladding had been carried out. The process principle
of the ECH of engine valves, experimental detail and results have been presented below:

The working principle of ECH process

The process principle of ECH is based on the Faraday’s laws of electrolysis and mechanical scrubbing. Figure 3 describes the proposed working principle of ECH process of
engine valves. In this process, most of the metal is removed at the atomic scale by anodic dissolution. Moreover, the honing action acts as a performance multiplier.
In ECH process, the workpiece is connected with the positive terminal and the tool is

Fig. 3 Proposed working principle of ECH of rebuild engine valve face

applied current is passed through them. During the process of material removal from
the workpiece, oxygen is evolved out at cathode after dissolution of aqua solution and
this oxygen reacts with anodic workpiece to form a thin metal oxide micro-film on
workpiece. This micro-film is insulating in nature and protects the workpiece surface
from being further removed and it minimizes the ECM action. This oxide layer on the
surface of the workpiece gear is scraped by the honing action when it comes in contact
with honing tool. The honing tool was spring loaded and help to complete scrubbing
of the workpiece surface. This scrubbed surface, when returning to the ECM zone, is
removed electrochemically once again. The surface quality and geometric accuracy of
the workpiece surface is rapidly improved as the process continue.




Table 2 List of fixed parameters of ECH [14, 15]
Power based parameters
Voltage

30 V

IEG

0.5 mm

Cathode material

Copper

Electrolyte based parameters
Composition

75 % NaCl + 25 % NaNO3

Concentration

10 % (by Volume)

Temperature

34 °C

Flow

15 lpm

Honing based parameters
Honing material

NiCr

Rotary speed

80 rpm

Abrasive size

800 mesh size

Pressure

0.03 MPa

Experimentation details

Figure 4 depicts the schematic diagram of the experimental setup of ECH of engine
valves. This setup has four subsystems namely (i) finishing chamber housing workpiece,
cathode and honing tools; (ii) electrolyte supply system; (iii) power supply system; and
(iv) rotation system to the tooling system. The input process parameters are fixed based
on the literature review and the machine constraints as described in Table 2 [14, 15].
For the present study, processing time and continuous DC current used as an input
process variable to investigate the effect of ECH on the clad surfaces by analysing the
surface roughness, morphology finished surface and geometrical accuracy before and
after the process. The range of input variables for ECH process have been presented in
Table 3. The processing time is increased at the interval of 20 s for each value of
current and fixed where profile error is minimum. The profile dimensions are checked
and compared with the original engine valve profile. The profile error is calculated
based on the difference in the profile area between the original (designed) part and finished workpiece (remanufactured). The negative sign shows the finished workpiece to
have a large profile area than original profile area and vice-versa. For the investigation,
the experimental setup has been designed and fabricated for ECH of rebuild surfaces of
engine valves as shown in Fig. 5.
Results and discussion

The experimental results of ECH of clad valve face have been presented in the following section. During the analysis of the results, main attention was focused on the surface roughness and profile dimensions of the workpiece. Table 4 presents the surface
roughness (Ra and Rt) values, profile error and processing time after each run. The
Table 3 List of variable input parameters of ECH of engine valves
Current (A)

20

30

40

50

60


Fig. 5 Photographic view of developed experimental setup for ECH of rebuild surfaces of engine valve face

effect of current on surface roughness is shown in Fig. 6. The optimum value of processing time is selected on the basis of average and maximum workpiece surface roughness. Hence, 120 s was selected as an optimum processing time and 30 A was selected
as appropriate amount of input current.

Study on micro-grinding of rebuild valve face
The micro-grinding process is widely used to produce functional surfaces of good
dimensional accuracy and precision finish [16]. During processing, the huge part of
the produced energy is transferred into thermal energy, which will damage the finished
surface in terms of surface deformation, swell, micro-cracks, peeling of surface, etc.
[17, 18]. Therefore, a fine grinding input parameters are applied to generate the
desired surface. Based on the best experimental conditions for the PTA cladding as
reported in the references, fine-grinding of working surface of the engine valve face
made of X40CrSiMo10-2 alloy steel has been carried out. The experimental details
and results are presented below:

Table 4 Results of surface roughness and processing time of ECH
Profile error (mm2)

Ra (μm)

Rt (μm)

160

+0.19

0.71

6.44

120

+0.12

0.59

6.65

40

80

- 0.28

0.84

7.24

50

80

+0.14

1.42

8.47

60

60

+0.08

1.95

9.06

Current (A)

Processing time (sec)

Fig. 6 Variations of surface roughness with different current

Experimentation details

Figure 7 presents the photographic view of micro-grinding of the engine valve face and
chips of removed material. The input process parameters are selected based on the literature review and the machine constraints as described in Table 5 and the list of
process variable parameters has been presented in Table 6.


Table 5 List of fixed input parameters of micro-grinding of clad surfaces [18]
Grinding wheel
Wheel material

Diamond, (SDC, P, B)

Grain size

800

Concentration

100

Grinding based parameters
Rotational speed

50 rpm

Speed type

Continuous (ACW)

Results and discussion

Table 7 presents the surface roughness (Ra and Rt) values, profile error and processing
time after each run. The effect of depth of cut on surface roughness is shown in Fig. 8.
The optimum value of processing time is selected on the basis of average and maximum
workpiece surface roughness. Hence, 8 min was selected as an optimum processing time.
It is evident from the results, surface roughness of the ground surface increases as the
depth of cut increases. It is also cleared from the plot that there is possibility to enhance
the surface quality under the 5 μm depth of cut. But is quite difficult to adjust in the
present experimental setup and it obviously increases the processing time further.

A comparison on process performance between micro-grinding and ECH
The comparison of process performance of micro-grinding and ECH have been presented in the following sections. Both the results were compared in terms of surface
roughness and morphology of the finished surface. Figure 9 shows the photographic
view of workpiece surface at different stages.

Surface roughness and material removal

For both the studies, similar conditions of the workpiece were used. Results show that
the surface roughness and material removal rate are significantly higher in the ECH
process as compared to conventional micro-grinding process. Table 8 presents a comparison of micro-grinding and ECH outcomes, which show that the ECH gives Ra
0.59 μm and Rt 6.65 μm as compared to micro-grinding which gives Ra 0.77 μm and
Rt 6.91 μm. It is observed that ECH gives a fine finishing operation at the processing
time of 120 s, which is 75 % less than the optimum processing time of micro-grinding
process.
Furthermore, ECH process provides the complete profile finish in a single setting of
tool and workpiece, but it is quite impossible using the micro-grinding process. This is
because of the copying accuracy of the ECH process which primarily depends on the
specific geometry of the cathode tool. It can be established that the multi-faces of the
engine valve are finished using ECH process, which makes the process further efficient
as compared to the micro-grinding process.
Table 6 List of variable input parameters of micro-grinding of engine valves
Depth of cut (μm)

5

10

15

20

25

Page 9 of 12

Table 7 Results of surface roughness and processing time of fine-grinding
Profile error (mm2)

Ra (μm)

Rt (μm)

8

+0.16

0.77

6.91

10

6.5

+0.13

0.96

7.03

15

4.25

+0.19

1.61

7.55

20

3

+0.15

1.79

7.69

25

2

+0.19

1.84

7.58

Depth of cut (μm)

Processing time (min)

5

Morphology of finished surfaces

Figure 10a, b and c illustrate the surface topographies of the workpiece surface before
finishing, after finishing using micro-grinding and ECH process. It is observed that the
surface texture of the finished workpiece by the ECH appears glazed and uniform, indicating significant improvement in the surface finish. It was observed that there was a
97.43 % rate of improvement in the surface of the finished workpiece through microgrinding, while an improvement rate of 97.63 % was recorded after finishing the part
through ECH. The typical profiles presented shows significantly reduced peaks in case
of the ECH processed surface.
The SEM analysis was also conducted on workpieces to investigate the morphology
of finished surface. Figure 11a clearly show that before finish, the work surface contains
voids, spots, porosity, pits etc. The micro-grinding surface of workpiece contains
scratches, fused particles etc., but the surface becomes uniform and smooth by removing irregularities as shown in Fig. 11b. The ECH surface presents a glazed appearance

Page 10 of 12

Fig. 9 Photographic view of engine valve faces at different stages

were removed due to the combined action of ECM and honing process. It is observed
that the abrasive feed marks are not visible in Fig. 11c due to the existence of low honing pressure in ECH as compared with micro-grinding conditions.

Conclusions
In this study, an alternative machining processes were used, in order to prepare a defect
free, smooth, geometrical accurate profile, and high finish of the workpiece surface for
a subsequent ECH process and its results are compared with the micro-grinding
process. The following conclusions could be drawn based on the comparative analysis.
a) The micro-grinding of PTA clad surfaces gives Ra 0.77 μm/ Rt 6.91 μm, while ECH
gives Ra 0.59 μm/ Rt 6.65 μm.
b) ECH process provides stress and thermal damage free finishing operation at higher
finishing rate. The ECH of precision finishing of clad surfaces takes 75 % less
processing time as compared with micro-grinding.
c) This study shows that a complete profile of the workpiece was finished in case of
ECH process depending on the specific geometry of the ECH cathode tool. But, in
case of micro-grinding process, only valve head face is finished in a single setting of
tooling system which made the ECH process further efficient.
d) It was found from the study that the micro-grinding of rebuild valve face have a
high tool wear and abrasive marks on the processed surface.
Table 8 A comparison of micro-grinding and ECH outcomes
Monitored parameters

Micro-grinding

ECH

Processing time (sec)

480

120

Ra (μm)

0.77

0.59

Ra (μm)

6.91

6.65

OOR (μm)


Fig. 10 Topography of the workpiece surfaces obtained through optical profilometer: a prefinished; b after
micro-grinding; c after ECH


e) It is reported that the ECH processed surface have no deep feed marks, microstructure
is more uniform and smooth as compared with the micro-grinding processed surface.
f ) Improvement in surface quality is rapid during the initial phases of ECH, while the
material removal rate remains almost unchanged.
