
One key aspect of efficient transport is load factor:
the load carried compared to the maximum load that
could be carried in a load unit (e.g. a vehicle). The
purpose of this study is to develop an approach that
will clarify and describe ways in which shippers can
measure load factor. Drawing on existing literature
and understanding gained from empirical data the
proposed approach uses the load factor model, which
structures measurement of load factor overall and at
several levels (packaging, shipping, vehicle, fleet) as
the ratio of required to available capacity. Shipping
level includes utilization of purchased capacity, which
is of special interest to shippers. For applying the model
in practice, calculation methods linked to availability
of data are presented. Calculations of volumetric load
factor from two cases illustrate the methods. This
paper’s detailed descriptions of how shippers can
measure load factor provide calculation structure
as well as transparency. Measuring load factor is of
interest to evaluate efficiency, particularly since load
factor is related to transport costs and environmental
performance.

Various political entities have long-term targets for a
considerable reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
within the transport sector; in the European Union,
for example, the goal is a 60 percent reduction of
greenhouse gases by 2050 [1]. Having a more efficient
transport system in place has been identified as one
important strategy to meet such targets [1]. Several
studies have found that increasing “load factor” is a
promising way to reduce the environmental impact of
transport-related activities through a more efficient
use of transport resources [2-5]. McKinnon [6]
states that “raising vehicle load factors is one of the
most attractive sustainable distribution measures to
companies because it yields substantial economic as
well as environmental benefits” (p. 243). Load factor
may be described as the load that is actually carried
compared to the maximum load that could have been
carried in a load unit, such as a vehicle [7-8].
Measuring performance is generally known to be
necessary for a company: for example, in order for
the company to support decision-making [9] and to
evaluate the progress of particular operations [10-12].
In particular, load factor (which may be classified as
an input/output measure) can be used to evaluate goal
attainment in specific areas of logistics efficiency [13].
Detailed descriptions of ways to measure load factor
performance are currently limited, however. In the
previous literature, load factor is often one of several
aspects that are measured in a larger performancemeasurement system, such as the measuring of CO2
emissions [3, 14], transport efficiency [7, 15], or
overall vehicle effectiveness [16]. Because previous
studies have generally covered load factor as only one
among several aspects within transport operations,
such studies have offered few details about measuring
load factor.
A standardized way to measure load factor is also
currently lacking. Different interpretations of the
load factor concept have been put forth regarding
the dimension that is measured (measuring weight,
deck area, or volume, for instance) as well as how to
measure that dimension (whether the load unit should
be included in the figure, for example). These differing
interpretations make it difficult to compare results

KEYWORDS: capacity · green logistics · load factor ·
measurement · shipper · transport efficiency
Vendela Santén (Corresponding author)
vendela.santen@sspa.se
Sara Rogerson
sara.rogerson@sspa.se
1

SSPA Sweden AB, Gothenburg, Sweden
and
Chalmers University of Technology,
Department of Technology Management
and Economics, Gothenburg, Sweden

are. Only measuring weight says nothing about the
volume utilization, for example, while measuring deck
area says nothing about the utilization of height. If a
vehicle is fully loaded with boxes but those boxes are
half empty, does that mean that the load factor is 100
percent? These challenges will be further examined
based on the previous literature in chapter 2 of this
paper.
Both transport providers and shippers have a major
incentive to assess their load factor, since this factor
is related to transport costs. For shippers, measuring
load factor involves other challenges beyond simply
measuring vehicle utilization, as has been done in
the literature to date [e.g. 3, 5, 7]. When a shipper
purchases transport services from a transport
provider, it is important for the shipper to know that
the purchased capacity will be utilized well; in other
words, they should not purchase more space than
they require. Shippers may contract different types
of services from their transport providers, including
dedicated service, truckload service, and less-thantruck-load service [17]. When a less-than-truck-load
service is contracted, for example, it is important to
know the load factor for that capacity.
A structured way to describe the various components
of load factor is needed. In particular, it is crucial to
understand a shipper’s perspective, because shippers
are generally interested in getting the most from their
purchased capacity. As a step towards addressing the
challenges associated with measuring load factor,
this study thus aims to develop an approach that will
describe ways in which shippers can measure load
factor. This model will facilitate calculations and will
lead to an increased understanding of shippers’ load
factor performance.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Chapter 2 reviews the existing literature so that the
challenges involved in load factor measurements may
be described; chapter 3 then describes the study’s
methodological choices. Chapter 4 presents the load
factor model. Chapter 5 describes how to calculate
load factor, and finally, chapters 6 and 7 discuss the
results and conclude the study, respectively.
2

LITERATURE REVIEW OF LOAD
FACTOR MEASUREMENTS

In order to address the challenges involved in load
factor measurement that were briefly mentioned in the
introduction, this chapter will describe the challenges
in more detail by drawing on the existing literature.
While the term load factor that is used in this paper
is commonly used in earlier studies, these studies also
use other terminology for the same concept, including
vehicle utilization, capacity utilization, fill rate, and
vehicle fill.

This paper describes the following three challenges
related to load factor measurement: first, a standardized
way to measure load factor is currently lacking;
second, collecting load factor data often involves
numerous uncertainties; and third, only measuring
load factor at the vehicle level is insufficient for
providing a comprehensive understanding of the
utilization of space.
2.1
No standardized way to measure load factor
Earlier studies have not consistently measured load
factor performance, because they have interpreted
the load factor concept in several ways and because a
standardized way to measure load factor is currently
lacking.
Different dimensions are generally used to measure
load factor – including weight, deck area, height,
empty running, or volume – and each dimension
has several definitions. Weight is the most common
dimension for measuring load factor. Examples of
load factor definitions related to weight from the
literature include “the ratio of the actual weight of
goods carried to the maximum weight that could have
been carried on a laden trip” [5], “revenue tonne-km
/ revenue tonne-km available” [18], “tonnes/vehicle”
[19], “kg/day” [20], and “payload weight” [21]. For the
dimension deck area, one previous study has defined
load factor as the percentage of occupied floor space
[22]. For the volume dimension, previous studies have
defined load factor as the “volume of product actually
despatched against the transport capacity deployed
for the movement” [23] and as the “internal volume/
external volume with lid” [24]. Other definitions
for volume have been put forth, such as “unutilised
capacity (number of units)” [25].
What constitutes a load factor of 100 percent will
be different depending on the dimension that is
measured; as an example, the occupied floor space
could result in a 100 percent load factor even if the
pallets are empty [22]. In addition, a weight-based
load factor might be high but not take the utilization of
the deck area into account [26]. Measuring load factor
in terms of payload weight, as shown in Pahlén and
Börjesson’s study [21], makes it possible to achieve a
load factor of more than 100 percent when in reality a
great deal of unutilized space exists. Several studies
have used more than one dimension to measure
load factor, which provides a better picture of the
utilization of the maximum capacity: McKinnon
and Ge [7] measure weight, deck area, and height,
for example, while Léonardi and Baumgartner [3]
measure weight, volume, and empty running. Still,
because previous studies have primarily used weightbased load factor measures, the volumetric measure
of the load is often missing. This is problematic, since
volumetric figures provide a better understanding of
the space that is required for a given load [8]. Gudehus
and Kotzab [27] take into account that capacity may
for example – as stated by truck operators in national
surveys [8] – measuring load factor in terms of volume
is of interest.
The lack of standards and the different interpretations
made when calculating load factor means that it is
difficult to understand the load factor figures or to
compare results between studies. Before load factor
figures may be interpreted, the details on dimensions
and definitions must be transparent so that the meaning
of the different figures will be clear. Considering
both weight and volume provides a more complete
picture of load factor in terms of the utilization of both
maximum space and maximum weight.
2.2
Challenges in collecting load factor data
Various challenges are also to be found in collecting
data to measure load factor. Weight-based data may
be reported in a company’s system, for instance, but
the data may be incorrect, as Pahlén and Börjesson
[21] found, or it may be inconsistent, as McKinnon [8]
discussed. McKinnon [8] pointed out several problems
involved in the compilation and interpretation of EU
freight-transport statistics. As a result, the load factor
figures that are available for the European Union
and its individual countries must be interpreted with
caution; for example, the data from different countries
have not been measured in a consistent manner [8].
Various inconsistencies in measuring the weight of
the goods in freight-transport data exist: for example,
whether or not the weight of the unit load device is
included. Due to difficulties in collecting accurate
load factor data based on weight, Giannouli et al. [28]
utilized assumptions of load factor in their emissions
calculations. Further, volumetric data on loads (which
would be of interest for loads that are constrained by
volume) are often unavailable in a company’s system;
instead, volumetric data are often collected based on
estimations or observations [21, 29]. Previous studies
rarely describe how these estimates have been made,
however. Increased transparency about what data are
used and how the data are used would be useful for
interpreting the results. In general, transparency is
encouraged by providing details about a study’s datacollection methods; guidelines would be useful for
achieving this kind of transparency, since previous
studies have used different approaches to arrive at
their load factor numbers.
2.3

Measuring load factor at the vehicle level
only
Load factor should be measured at several system
levels to show the efficient use of transport resources.
Many earlier studies have measured load factor at the
vehicle level, such as those conducted by McKinnon
and Ge [7], Kellner and Igl [30], and Leach, Savage,
and Maden [31]. While measuring load factor in
vehicles is useful for determining vehicle utilization,
the measure does not reflect the efficient use of the

3

units that are transported inside the vehicles: for
example, doing so does not show how fully loaded
the containers on a ship or the boxes on a truck are.
Gudehus and Kotzab [27], on the other hand, focus
on load factor and packing strategies for one level at
a time. In order to capture the efficient use of units
inside units, Samuelsson and Tilanus [32] included
lower levels than the vehicle level in their capacityefficiency measure, including floor occupancy, height
utilization, pallet and box characteristics, net product,
and loading-execution efficiency. Also, Santén [33]
included lower level measures; packaging, loading
and booking efficiency. Comparing load with a
fleet’s capacity is another system-level approach that
is previous research exemplified in the context of
container liner shipping [34].
For shippers, measuring load factor involves
challenges beyond simply measuring vehicle
utilization between terminals. The utilization of the
purchased capacity is an important consideration for
those shippers that purchase transport services from
transport providers; as such, shippers should not
purchase more space than is necessary. For shippers
that send less-than-full truckloads, the efficient
use of the purchased capacity may be more directly
influenced than the utilization of the whole vehicle
(which the transport provider fills with goods from
other shippers). In such situations, it would be useful for
shippers to measure their capacity utilization related to
their purchased capacity [33]. As a result, measuring
load factor has to account for more levels than simply
the vehicle and take into account the perspective of
the shipper. Shippers should also measure the efficient
use of packaging, as shown in Pålsson, Finnsgård, and
Wänström’s study [24]. From a shipper’s perspective,
the efficient use of resources should thus encompass
both packaging and the shipper’s purchased capacity.
2.4

Requirements on a structured way to
measure load factor
A clarification and description of how shippers can
measure load factor is necessary because of the many
problems described above. The challenges identified in
previous studies, leads to the following requirements
on a structured way to measure load factor:
• enable shippers to measure load factor;
• provide a transparent method of measuring;
• allow historical comparisons to be made
between transport flows and between
companies;
• be comprehensive (that is, be able to express
load factor at several system levels so that
situations may be avoided in which empty
boxes in a vehicle result in a high load factor);
• be able to handle both volume and weight,
since both dimensions can restrict the
• allow applications that are independent of
the characteristics of the goods flow (for
example, different load units).
3.

METHOD

This study developed an approach for measuring load
factor, in which the challenges mentioned above were
considered so that ways in which shippers can measure
their load factor performance could be clarified. The
approach in this paper further details the load factor
model briefly presented in Rogerson and Santén [41]
and proposes methods for calculations when applying
the load factor model in practice. New knowledge is
generated by the development of small-scale theories
[35], where the various components of measuring load
factor is structured. A high level of practical relevance
is aimed for and for that reason illustrations of load
factor calculations are provided from two cases.
The challenges involved in load factor measurements
were derived from a structured literature review
conducted during the initial phase of this study,
described in part in Santén and Rogerson [36].
Thereafter, the study progressed in three main steps.
The first step built on the existing literature on
logistics, transportation, and capacity management;
during this step, a conceptual model was developed
that outlined required versus available capacity as
well as several load factor levels (see Fig. 1 in chapter
3). In the second step, details were elaborated in the
load factor model showing which aspects determine
the volume and weight of the required and available
capacity (see Fig. 2 in chapter 3). These insights were
drawn from systematically combining empirical
data from two cases with existing literature in line
with Dubois and Gadde [37]. The two cases offered
an excellent opportunity for depth of observation
[38], and provided a deep and detailed understanding
regarding measuring load factor and descriptions of
ways in which load factor may be calculated. Finally,
an approach for how to calculate the load factor was
proposed, drawing on the practical problems involved
when conducting load factor calculations in the two
cases (see Fig. 3 in chapter 5).
3.1
Case selection
The cases included two specific goods flows in
two companies, which were selected according to
purposeful sampling criteria; to feature the particular
aspects of interest as a way of providing in-depth
understanding and insight [39] about the shippers’
load factor measurements. Case Food Distribution
was a wholesaler that distributes frozen food, chilled
food and groceries to Swedish supermarkets several
times per week. Case Energy Equipment was a
manufacturer of large, heavy energy equipment for
international construction sites. The two cases showed

key components of the load factor model in terms
of several load factor levels, such as packaging and
shipping, and the use of different load units (boxes vs.
pallets). Selecting cases that represent the common
situation that shippers purchase their transports from
a third party [40], allowed measuring efficient use of
purchased capacity.
The cases were part of a larger research project
focusing on load factor performance. That larger
research project had a wider scope than measuring
shippers’ load factor, also studying how shippers
could improve their load factor. While this paper
uses the cases to illustrate how load factor can
be measured, Rogerson and Santén [41] structure
shippers’ opportunities to increase load factor. The
load factor figures stated in Rogerson and Santén [41]
as the starting point before changes to improve load
factor in case Energy Equipment are used in this paper.
The specific case described for Food Distribution
consists of data for a transport to different recipients
and a different point in time compared to case Food
Distribution in Rogerson and Santén [41]. The data
collection and analysis described below focus on the
method applied for the purpose of this paper.
3.2
Data collection
The data were collected through semi-structured
interviews, internal company documents, and
observations of the packing and loading processes. For
a summary of the data collected from the two cases
see Appendix A.
Over a period of one year several rounds of
interviews were conducted with the respondents
(Table 1). The interview guides included questions
that were important for (1) the details in the load factor
model (Fig. 2) and (2) calculating the load factor based
on the load factor model (Fig. 1). The interviews were
also used for presenting the ongoing work and give
the respondents possibility to provide input from their
practical experience on the applicability of the model
and approach to measuring load factor.
Table 1: Respondents in the two cases
Case
Food
Distribution

Energy
Equipment

Respondents
Transport-planning manager,
logistics manager, transport-order
manager, transport-operating
manager
Project manager; supplier manager;
transportation and logistics
manager, Northern Europe; global
packaging category manager;

Further, internal company documents on the
transport and load data were collected and observations
also served a major role. In both cases, an initial
observation provided an overview of the situation of
the company’s packing and loading activities. For the
Food Distribution case, a second observation showed
more details and examined specific aspects that had
been identified from interviews to determine required
and available capacity for the specific goods flow to
be measured. The investigators used an observation
protocol and took photos of the activities that they
examined in the study. In both cases load factor
was measured at the point of departure of a specific
outbound goods flow, for case Food Distribution from
the central warehouse and in case Energy Equipment
from the manufacturing site.
3.3
Data analysis
To describe how load factor could be measured, those
aspects that determine load factor were identified in
an iterative process combining (1) calculations of load
factor performance according to the structure in Fig.
1, and (2) reflections on how to derive the load factor
figures.
The aspects were derived from the data collected in
the two cases as well as previous literature, and were
sorted according to whether the aspects determined
required and available capacity resulting in the more
detailed model (Fig. 2).
The load factor was calculated in the two cases
for two load factor levels (packaging and shipping)
as well as the overall level (see Fig. 1). The required
and available capacity were calculated in volumetric
terms, since volume was identified as constraining
the maximum load in both cases. Quantitative data
based on internal documentation, interviews, and
observations were used for the calculations. The
applied methods for deriving required and available
capacity in the two cases illustrate necessary
estimations and simplifications when calculating load
factor in practice.
3.4
Research quality
Tables and figures showing the calculations, load factor
performance, and the load factor model for each case
were discussed with three respondents from each case
for verification. The quantitative data as well as method
used for calculating the load factor was also discussed
on more than two occasions with the two respondents
who had provided the quantitative data used for the
calculations. The framework was presented at several
workshops with industry participants, which allowed
the researchers to acquire feedback on the usefulness

of the model and the method for calculating load
factor. The responses from these workshops indicated
that the model was indeed transferable to contexts
beyond the two cases that were examined in this study.
4.

THE LOAD FACTOR MODEL

In response to the challenges addressed in chapter
2, a first step is to be able to describe shippers’ load
factor at several system levels in volume and weight.
To do so, this chapter presents a load factor model
(Fig. 1), drawing on a model briefly presented in
Rogerson and Santén [41]. This chapter elaborates on
the model, providing more details and also placing it
in the context of logistics and transport systems. It
further explains the details with regards to aspects
determining required and available capacity (Fig.
2). The model and its components are described
in this chapter with the literature underpinning
the descriptions. Illustrations of various aspects of
measuring load factor in accordance with this model
are provided from the studied cases (Table 2).
The definition of load factor used in this paper,
which builds on the definition of vehicle loading
proposed by McKinnon and Ge [7], is the ratio of the
load carried (required capacity) to the maximum load
that could have been carried (available capacity). The
model structures the load factor on different levels
(packaging, shipping, vehicle and fleet) based on
the balance between required and available capacity
(see Fig. 1). The model’s logic focuses on balancing
the capacity required for the goods to be transported
with the capacity available to transport the goods.
The model distinguishes between logistics and
transportation systems, as described by Woxenius
and Sjöstedt [42], such that the logistics system is the
shipper’s system when outsourcing transport and the
transport system concerns the shipper’s management
of its own transport operations or those of transport
providers. The scope of this paper is to translate the
general definition of load factor into a definition from
a shipper’s operational perspective when outsourcing
transport, i.e. the logistics system in the model. Since
all load factor levels will influence the efficiency of
the transport operations as a whole it is also important
for shippers to be aware of the load factor in the larger
system levels, i.e. the transport system. Therefore,
the logic of the different load factor levels in both the
logistics and the transport system is described in this
chapter, while the cases focus on shippers measuring
their load factor (in the logistics system). A detailed
approach regarding the transport system is addressed

4.1
Balancing required and available capacity
Required and available capacity can be measured
using volume and/or weight to calculate a ratio of
how well the available capacity is utilised. Often,
it is useful to measure the dimension (i.e. weight or
volume) that constrains the maximum load [cf. 16].
However, to achieve a perspective on the load factor
that encompasses both weight and volume, the load
factor model can be used to calculate both individually.
A high load factor is achieved when the required and
available capacities are balanced in terms of volume
(length * width * height) and/or weight.
The model can be used to compare both actual
required capacity and available capacity in a specific
time period and estimated required and available
capacity for a future period. The period can be short
(e.g. a particular delivery or deliveries during a day)
or long (e.g. deliveries over the course of a month). It
is important for the time period being measured to be
clear.
4.2
The load factor levels
A number of different load factor levels exist:
packaging level (1, 2, …, n), shipping level, vehicle
level and fleet level. To achieve a comprehensive
understanding of the load factor performance, it is
important to consider the balance between the required
and the available capacity on all load factor levels. For
example, measuring only the vehicle level could give
an impression of high performance, even if the vehicle
is loaded with nearly empty boxes. The number and
types of levels that exist in a given shipper’s system
may vary depending on the situation and the type of
contract. For example, a manufacturing company will
have different packaging levels than a distributor, and
the shipping level can either be a share of a vehicle

(if purchasing LTL) or one or several vehicles (if
purchasing FTL).
At a packaging level, the required capacity is the
load to be packed, and the available capacity is the
load unit into which the load will be packed. Several
packaging levels are possible, which previous literature
has described as primary, secondary and tertiary [43]
or in terms of containers, roll cages, pallets, boxes
and similar items. For example, Samuelsson and
Tilanus [32] include a box load factor and a pallet load
factor as partial-capacity efficiencies in a less-thantruckload (LTL) distribution system. In our model,
we denote packaging levels using the numbers 1 to
n; therefore, Samuelsson and Tilanus’ [32] example
translates as products loaded in a box at packaging
level 1 and boxes loaded at a pallet at packaging level
2. Individual shippers can decide which load factor
levels are relevant to measure in their systems. For
example, if products are delivered to a shipper from
their supplier in their primary packaging, and the
packaging is never broken before packing the items
on pallets to prepare for shipments to the shipper’s
customers, level 1 packaging (products in their
primary packaging) is outside the shipper’s own
responsibility. Instead, the load factor at the second
(and larger) packaging level(s) can be influenced more
directly by that particular shipper, and thereby their
primary focus.
At the shipping level, the required capacity is the
load to be shipped (i.e., goods leaving the shipper),
and the available capacity is the purchased capacity
for the load. The shipping level is more aggregated
than the packaging levels. The load to ship is the sum
of packaging level n and can also include the load
resulting from other packaging levels. For example,

Figure 2: Determining required and available capacity

items comprising both products packed on pallets
(level 2) and other (bigger) products packed in their
own packaging (level 1) and loaded directly onto
the purchased capacity. The purchased capacity is of
interest to a shipper outsourcing freight transport. In
the model, purchased capacity can be smaller than
a vehicle (less than a truckload), a vehicle (a full
truckload) or several vehicles, depending on what is
purchased. Available capacity for shippers purchasing
full truckload services is the capacity of the whole
vehicle, while available capacity for shippers
purchasing less than a truckload of services is the
purchased share of the vehicle (e.g. a specific number
of pallets). When purchasing less than a truckload of
service, the shipper measures its share at the shipping
level, not at the vehicle level. The load from one shipper
may be consolidated with goods from other companies
in the case of less than a truckload of services, and
such consolidation is organised by the transport
provider [44]. In such situations, the vehicle- and fleetlevel load factors are considered to fall outside the
scope of the shipper’s load factor measurements.
At the vehicle and fleet levels, the required capacity
is the load to be shipped on one or several vehicles,
and the available capacity is the vehicle(s) available for
the load. This level is included in the shipper’s system
if the shipper manages the transport (i.e. owns his or
her own vehicle) or if the shipper coordinates its goods
with goods from other shippers (i.e. without help from
transport providers).
4.3

Determining required and available
capacity
This section describes the aspects that determine
required capacity and available capacity, which
must be considered when calculating load factor.
See Fig. 2 for the aspects determining required and
available capacity. The studied cases illustrate aspects
determining required and available capacity (Table 2).
4.3.1 Determining required capacity
Required capacity is the volume or weight of the
load at each load factor level (packaging levels 1 to
n, shipping level, vehicle level, and fleet level). The

volume and weight of the load are determined by order
details, item characteristics, number of items, and
possibilities for combining items (where an item is a
product or packed load unit). The load (at each load
factor level) comprises one or more items. An item at
a higher load factor level can be a load unit used at
a lower load factor level (e.g. a box). This unit is the
available capacity at the packaging level, but an item
to load at the next level.
Items can be combined in different ways [e.g.
45]. Which items can be combined is determined
by the order details (e.g. order size, delivery time,
delivery address, delivery frequency and shipment
consolidation) [46], meaning for example that a
specific load unit can only contain items to the same
delivery address [27]. Further, how items can be
combined depends on their characteristics in terms of
shape [e.g. 45], sensitivity [e.g. 44], stackability (i.e.
if items can be stacked on top of one another) [e.g.
45, 47] and density [e.g. 48]. For examples, see case
descriptions in Table 2.
4.3.2 Determining available capacity
Available capacity is the volume or weight available
in load units (at each load factor level) for a given
load. The available capacity in terms of volume is the
inner dimensions of the load units at each load factor
level (packaging, shipping, vehicle and fleet) for the
number of load units. Similarly, the available capacity
in terms of weight is the weight available for the load.
The volume and weight available for a load unit are
determined by the type of the load unit: which load
unit is used (the size), what equipment exists in the
load unit (e.g. cooling equipment), and the material
of the load unit. The equipment may use up space
or weight thus reducing the available capacity for
packing or loading items and resulting in less available
capacity. The material of the load unit may determine
the weight it can carry. The material of the load unit
protects the contents, for example, during packaging
[49]. A protective packaging material may reduce
the need to protect the product inside the packaging.
In case Energy Equipment boxes were designed to
capacity

Available
capacity

Required
capacity

Available
capacity

Packaging level
Food Distribution: 3,450 products to 3 shops were packed in layers on standardised EURpallets. Item characteristics of particular relevance for how the items could be positioned
and oriented were shape and sensitivity to damage and temperature. Some products had
irregular shapes, resulting in packing loss (air). Items sensitive to damage (e.g. crisps) could
not support heavy products on top. Items were allocated to different pallets depending on
temperature regimes (e.g. frozen food, chilled food and groceries).
Energy Equipment: 530 items (18 large) were combined, taking into account sequence
of unpacking, shape and risk of damage. The sequence of unpacking determined which
products could be packed in which boxes. Many products had irregular shapes (e.g. legs
protruding in one direction), resulting in packing loss (air). Risk of damage resulted in extra
packaging material inside the boxes.
Food Distribution: 69 standardised EUR-pallets were used. Volume possible to load was
determined by the length, width and height of the pallets. The height limit (1.25 m excl.
pallet) allowed double stacking and unloading at the recipients.
Energy Equipment: 21 customized boxes were available for loading goods. The size of each
customized box was adapted to the size of the items to be packed inside. The boxes were
designed to protect the goods, i.e. through stiff and strong material, which also made it
possible to double stack large boxes on the shipping level.
Shipping level
Food Distribution: 69 packed pallets were loaded onto a large truck combination (vehicle
and trailer). Some pallets were easy to stack (level); other pallets were uneven and could not
support stacking. To avoid products being crushed (e.g. crisps) certain pallets could only
be loaded as a top layer. Pallets were allocated to different zones in the truck depending on
temperature regimes (e.g. frozen food, chilled food and groceries).
Energy Equipment: 21 boxes of varying size were loaded onto vehicles. Large boxes were not
always possible to stack or position in one direction, e.g. if the height of two boxes stacked
on top of one another was greater than the space available inside the vehicle.
Food Distribution: A large truck and trailer combination with capacity for loading 96 double
stacked pallets (48+48). The equipment in the vehicle (i.e. the cooling equipment, internal
walls to separate different temperature zones and a fork lift for unloading goods) reduced the
available capacity by 2 m3 to 94 pallets (135 m3).
Energy Equipment: 8 vehicles were available, each capable of loading 65 m3 of goods.

Different types of load units exist, and these have
different available capacities in terms of load volume
and weight (e.g. type of truck [50] or pallets [47]).
Load units that are customised (specialised) to a
specific purpose may be adjusted to the dimensions of
the planned content (required capacity), in [27] called
a dimension adjustment strategy. Standardised load
units, on the other hand, can be used for many purposes
and have specific dimensions. The number of load
units is related to the type of load unit selected: one
unit with a large capacity or several units with smaller
individual capacities. The different type of load units
and their respective capacity are exemplified in cases,
see Table 2.

4.4

Interaction between various levels in the
load factor model
Load factor measurements must consider all levels.
Measuring the load factor of only one level, says
nothing about the load factors on the other levels
and may, therefore, be misleading. For example, the
box on the first packaging level may have a high load
factor, while the next packaging level has a low load
factor due to difficulties in combining units on the
pallet. Furthermore, on the second packaging level,
the pallet can be fully loaded with boxes, even if the
boxes themselves have a low load factor (unoccupied
capacity).
The interactions among load factor levels reflect the
connections among load factor levels and how available
capacity at a lower level affects required capacity at
a higher level. The packed load unit at a lower level
on the outer dimensions of the packaging, rather than
the inner volume of packaging that is the basis for the
available capacity.
Further, measuring load factor at each load factor
level must be complemented with an overall measure
of load factor. This overall measure compares the
required capacity at the lowest load factor level
with the available capacity at the highest load factor
level. The overall measure indicates how much of the
volume or weight is used by the smallest loading units
(often products) and unused capacity refers to both the
volume and weight of the load unit and the space left
unused when packing and loading items on each level.
In addition to the overall load factor measure and
the measures at each load factor level mentioned
above, a complementing measure is the ratio between
the available capacity at one packaging level and
the required capacity at one higher load factor level
[cf 24]. This measure facilitates an understanding of
how much of the packaging is available for packing/
loading goods, such that a high number means that the
packaging material takes up little space.
5.

APPROACH FOR CALCULATING THE
LOAD FACTOR

In this chapter, an approach for calculating load factors
from the perspective of a shipper is presented. The
approach is a stepwise guide for how to use the load
factor model and the aspects determining required
and available capacity when calculating load factor in
practice. The calculation method needs to be adapted
to the specific situation in the company, e.g. regarding
availability of data, and thereby it is important to
measure in a structured way and to be transparent
about the basis of the calculations (so the load factor
numbers are not misinterpreted). Calculating load
factor in the two studied cases illustrates the use of the
approach and the calculation methods proposed . The
approach is summarised in Fig. 3.
First, the system in which the load factor should
be measured is defined. To facilitate a complete
evaluation of the load factor, both weight and volume
(or, alternatively, the dimension[s] constraining the
load) are calculated. Furthermore, the time period for
measuring the load factor is decided. For example, the
load factor can be calculated for each departure, each
day, each week or each month. Further, the load factor
levels in the measured system must be identified.
As a second step, for each load factor level, required
and available capacity, respectively, are calculated.

9

Fig. 3 Approach for calculating load factors
Calculation difficulties stem from what data is
available. As pointed out in Gudehus and Kotzab [27]
many companies do not register or update such data.
Two different calculation methods for required and
available capacity are described in Table 3.
The two methods to calculate required capacity are:
(a) summarising the weight or volume of all individual
items and (b) measuring the weight or volume of
the items after they have been combined. The most
appropriate method depends on the availability of
data. As explained earlier the required capacity is the
volume or weight of the load to be packed/loaded.
In an ideal world calculation of required capacity
would involve summarising the weight or volume of
individual items (method a). However, data regarding
individual weight or volume may not be available in
the company’s system. As the load to be packed/loaded
may consist of various items, it could involve much
work to measure each individual item. Simplifications
may therefore be necessary. As an example, in case
Energy Equipment odd-sized items at the packaging
level were calculated as a box (the maximum width
multiplied by the maximum length of each item)
since this was the volume information available in
the company’s systems. Further, when method a
(summarising the weight or volume of all individual
items) is used, volume calculations must consider how
the items are combined. Item combinations may be
limited by item characteristics, such as shape, size,
weight, stackability and sensitivity. Odd-shaped items
may be impossible to combine on a load unit without
some air between the items. Simplifications may be
necessary when there are difficulties obtaining data on

Method

Notes

Required
capacity

(a) Summarise the
weight or volume of
individual items

Possible simplification: Calculate odd-sized items as a box
(maximum width multiplied by maximum length of the item).

(b) Measure weight
or volume after items
have been combined

Possible simplification: Subtract empty space
after items have been packed/loaded

(a) Use maximum
weight/volume the
load unit can carry

Possible simplification: Regarding maximum packing height on
pallets, use for example average height to which pallets are packed
in the specific situation.

(b) Use inner
dimensions

Note that weight/volume taken up by equipment has to be
deducted.

Available
capacity

If data on individual items are not available and
difficult to obtain, an alternative method (method b) is
to measure the weight or volume after items have been
combined. For volume, required capacity is calculated
using the outer dimensions (i.e. length, height and
width). For weight, total required capacity is measured,
meaning that everything that is loaded into the load
unit at the load factor level must be measured. For
example, when measuring load factor at the shipping
level, a load unit (e.g. a pallet) at the packaging level
must be included. However, at the packaging level, if
measuring after the items have been combined, the
load units (e.g. the pallet) weight or volume must be
deducted, since the required capacity comprises the
items to be put onto the pallet. When using method b,
the unused space between the items on the load unit
must be included in the required capacity. Further,
it may be simpler to measure the volume not utilised
inside a load unit. In case Food Distribution the
required capacity at the shipping level was calculated
by subtracting empty space in the truck after goods
had been loaded inside the truck. Method b (measuring
the weight or volume of the items after they have been
combined) may also be necessary when data regarding
packing and loading patterns are missing.
To evaluate the results of the packing and loading
operation (i.e., the amount of unused space), data on
both individual items (method a) and combined items
(method b) can be compared. To be even more detailed,
it would be possible to specify the weight/volume of
the load units as part of required capacity on each
load factor level (except the first level, which consists
only of products). Such details would allow evaluating
how much of required capacity consist of load units in
relation to unused space and loaded items.
The two methods to calculate available capacity
are: (a) use maximum weight or volume the load unit
can carry and (b) use inner dimensions. The available
capacity is the volume or weight that a load unit can
carry. Volume can be calculated based on the inner

dimensions (i.e. length, height and width) of, for
example, a box (method b), or based on the volume
(i.e. length, height and width) that can be put on, for
example, a pallet (method a). For weight, the available
capacity is the maximum weight that can be put on
the load unit, excluding the weight of the load unit
itself. For example, the maximum load of a pallet is
commonly 1,200 kilograms (although some variations
exist), and the maximum volume is the size of the
base of the pallet (e.g. 0.8 by 1.2 meters) multiplied by
the height to which the pallet can be loaded (e.g. 1.5
meters, where the height may vary due to health and
safety regulations). The maximum height of a closed
load unit, such as a box, depends on its construction
[27]. The maximum height to which a flat load unit
can be packed or loaded is a design parameter, but
restrictions regarding safety and stacking need to be
considered [27]. Therefore data regarding the height
to which a pallet can be loaded may differ between
companies. It may also be difficult to obtain exact
information regarding maximum pallet height. For
example, the available capacity on a pallet in case
Food Distribution was calculated based on the average
height of the loaded pallets, excluding the height of
the actual pallet. Further, the volume or weight of
any equipment in the vehicle (e.g. bars for double
stacking or walls for separating temperature regimes)
reduces the available capacity and therefore needs
to be deducted in the calculations. Such deductions
should be transparent in order to be able to follow
up space used by necessary equipment on board the
vehicle. For example, for calculations in case Food
Distribution the volume of inner walls in the vehicle
separating temperature zones, and the volume of the
fork-lift needed to unload the goods upon delivery,
were deducted from available capacity in the truck.
It is important to note that the load factor levels are
connected. For example, at the packaging level, the
inner dimension of a box is the available capacity. At

Table 4: Calculating load factor, examples from two cases
Case
Food
Distribution
Case
Energy
Equipment
Required
capacity

Available
capacity

Required
capacity
Available
capacity

Results of load factor calculations
Overall: 52% (70 m /135 m3)
Packaging level: 84% (70 m3/83 m3)
Shipping level: 87% (117 m3/135 m3)
Overall: 49% (256 m3/520 m3)
Packaging level: 74% (256 m3/347 m3)
Shipping level: 84% (435 m3/520 m3)
Packaging level
In case Food Distribution it was measured after the items had been combined on pallets. The
number was calculated based on the number of pallets (69) needed for the packed items. The
volume per pallet was based on the length (1.2 m) and width (0.8 m) of each pallet multiplied
by the estimated average height of a packed pallet (1.05 m excl. pallet). The height to which
pallets were packed was based on average figures from the shipper’s internal documentation
and further validated with the transport planning manager and through on-site observations
of the specific goods flow. Estimations of packed pallets were used since volume data were
not available for individual items in the shipper’s database. In case Energy Equipment it
was calculated by summarising the outer volumes of the 530 individual items. The volume
data was the simplified calculation of the items as a square box (available in CAD from the
shipper’s internal documentation).
In case Food Distribution the maximum volume of the pallets was calculated based on the
number of pallets (69), the dimensions of each pallet and the maximum allowed height of
1.25 m (excl. pallet). In case Energy Equipment the volume of the boxes was calculated by
summarizing the inner volume of all individual boxes.
Shipping level
In case Food Distribution it was calculated by subtracting empty space from the available
capacity inside the truck after pallets were loaded. Empty space was estimated during
observation. In case Energy Equipment it was calculated by summarising outer volumes of
the boxes to load.
In case Food Distribution the volume inside the truck was calculated by multiplying the
inner dimensions of the vehicle and subtracting the volume taken up by equipment (internal
walls and a fork lift for unloading goods). In case Energy Equipment the volume available for
loading goods was calculated by multiplying the inner dimensions of the vehicle.
3

same box is the required capacity as the length, height
and width of the item. In weight calculations, available
capacity at the packaging level is the maximum weight
that can be loaded onto the load unit. At the next load
factor level, the actual weight of the load unit, including
its load, is used to calculate the required capacity. For
example, at the packaging level, the available capacity
is the weight that can be put onto a pallet, excluding
the weight of the pallet. Meanwhile, when calculating
the required capacity on the shipping level, the weight
of the pallet has to be included.
As a third step, the load factor at each load factor
level and the overall load factor are calculated. The
load factor at each load factor level is calculated
by dividing the required capacity by the available
capacity. To calculate the overall load factor, the

smallest required capacity is divided by the largest
available capacity, resulting in a figure of how much
weight/volume is occupied by the smallest items.
For the overall load factor, unused capacity consists
of both the volume/weight of the load units and air
between items when combining them, which can be
derived from detailed figures of required capacity.
This unused capacity can be divided into necessary
(e.g. load unit) or unnecessary (e.g. air), using detailed
figures from the calculations.
The result from the load factor calculations in the
two cases as well as the details from the calculation
DISCUSSION

This paper focuses on load factor measurements from
a shipper’s operational perspective. Previous research
has described load factor measures in general terms,
while this paper takes a detailed approach. Building
on the load factor definition used by McKinnon and
Ge [7], compared to previous research, the approach
for measuring load factor presented in this paper uses
a load factor model that includes several load factor
levels. Using several levels broadens the load factor
concept (which, in much of the previous research, has
focused on vehicle utilisation [e.g. 5, 8, 51] or one level
at a time [e.g. 27]). The main argument for measuring
load factors at several levels is that measuring only
one level can be misleading, since such an approach
does not offer information on the performance of
other levels. There are interactions between the
levels, for example, how items are packed on the
pallet (packaging level) influences the possibilities to
stack them on the vehicle (shipping level). Thereby, in
order to avoid sub optimisations, several load factor
levels need to be taken into account. Compared to
Samuelsson and Tilanus’ [32] capacity efficiency
framework (including both pallet and box levels)
and Santén’s [33] packaging, loading and booking
efficiency, the load factor model in this paper can be
adapted to different shippers’ systems with regards to
how many levels to include, what constitutes required
and available capacity at each load factor level and
has a clear distinction between required and available
capacity at each level. Further, the load factor model
pinpoints which levels are included in the shipper’s
system as well as the transport system. Further, an
overall load factor measure is included in this paper,
which facilitates an understanding of how much of the
volume or weight is used by the smallest loaded units
(often products) in relation to purchased capacity.
The proposed approach to calculate load factor
outlines specific steps for calculating load factor and,
in particular, describes methods to calculate required
and available capacity. The approach is valuable since
a standardised method of measuring load factors is
lacking, where earlier studies have followed different
interpretations of what aspects should be included.
The presented approach to calculate load factor
provides additional suggestions regarding necessary
simplifications and the need to account for equipment,
compared to Gudehus and Kotzab [27]. Furthermore,
where most previous literature tends to consider only
weight (e.g. [5]) and, occasionally, volume (e.g. [24])
in load factor measurements, our approach includes
both.
The two methods described for calculating required
and available capacity clarify the required data,
including decisions regarding the level of detail in the
data. To avoid inconsistencies in the calculations, such
as whether the load unit is included in the load or not
[8], the proposed method for calculating the load factor

provides details regarding how to conduct consistent
calculations. In particular, this clarification is
supported by the illustration of volumetric load factor
calculations in the cases, since the volume of goods is
generally more difficult to measure than their weight
[8]. The level of detail depends on access to data and the
time available to collect data, and estimations may be
necessary. However, calculating load factors for many
shipments may require greater simplifications than the
examples provided in this paper. Such applications
and simplifications should be studied in more detail.
Furthermore, when interpreting the results, there
should be an awareness of the potential uncertainties
of the calculations (e.g. subjective judgements when
estimating a load). Therefore, to achieve consistency
in the measurement of load factors, details need to
be transparent. Such consistency is necessary when
evaluating current performance to identify potential
for improvement, update the load factor after possible
changes, and to benchmark.
Several avenues for further research open up related
to the load factor model. The model structures load
factor from a shipper’s perspective, to be measured
at the point of departure from the shipper. The cases
show the use of the load factor model in two situations,
which differed with regards to, for example, (a) type
of products, (b) type of packaging and (c) purchased
capacity. Further research could test the model in other
situations, such as detailing measurement on smaller
packaging levels and in different contract situations.
Also, the application of the model to shippers using
other modes of transport, such as sea, air and rail is
relevant to study further.
Moreover, in order to achieve macro-level goals (e.g.
environmental performance) it is important to widen
the scope of the measurement, so that suboptimal
solutions are not identified. First, the applicability
of the load factor model for transport providers is of
interest in order to understand efficiencies with regards
to vehicle and fleet levels (when these are managed
by the transport provider). Second, in a distribution
round, the load factor will vary at each delivery point
[52]; thus, the order of delivery and the transport
distance must be taken into account. Therefore, future
research would benefit from broadening the scope to
include a vehicle’s entire trip. Third, further studies
into combining volumetric and weight-based load
factor measures are of interest so that the most optimal
load factor across fleets can be identified.
Measuring load factor is a step towards making
improvements, for example improving packing
strategies, as detailed in Gudehus and Kotzab [27],
and having calculated the load factor, areas that are
relevant to change can be identified [41]. In Rogerson
and Santén [41] the idea of balancing required and
available capacities is used to structure means for
shippers to improve load factor according to changes
to aspects determining respective capacities. Further
to evaluate how it could be used for following up on
improvements.
7.

CONCLUSIONS

This paper presents an approach for calculating load
factor: (1) define the system in which load factor should
be measured; (2) calculate required and available
capacity for each load factor level; and (3) calculate
the load factor on each load factor level as the ratio of
required to available capacity.
Taking a shipper’s perspective, measuring load
factor includes several levels (e.g. packaging and
shipping). Measuring load factor at only one load
factor level, such as the vehicle level, can significantly
overestimate capacity utilisation, particularly if the
load factors at other levels are low. To fully understand
load factor performance, therefore, it is important
to calculate both the overall load factor and the
constituent load factor levels.
Methods for calculating required and available
capacity are suggested, and offer guidance depending
on what data that is available. Consistent and
transparent calculations are important.
By using the approach for calculating load factors
shippers can measure their load factor, and understand
imbalances that exist, including at which levels their
required and available capacities are imbalanced.
Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest
Conflicts of interest: The authors declare that they
have no conflicts of interest.