ecological one.
For companies, environmental problems caused by the use of energy and natural resources,
by pollution or any kind of waste, represent both development opportunities and constraints
as they can, on one hand, change the competitive landscape of many industries
(Shrivastava, 1995), and on the other hand, can influence consumer behavior (Roberts and
Bacon, 1997).
Besides their innovation and job generation related aims (Dinu, Grosu and Saseanu, 2015),
many entrepreneurial ventures are aware that they must invest in environment to stay in
business, taking it into consideration as a development opportunity, too. In this context,
derived from social marketing - that study the interrelationships between marketing and
society (Stoian, 2003) – was created the green marketing concept (Peattie, 1992; Ottman,
1993). Similar terms are environmental marketing (Coddington, 1993), sustainable
marketing (Fuller, 1999) or greener marketing (Charter and Polonsky, 1999).
Green Marketing (sustainable marketing) is the process of planning, pricing, promoting and
distributing products in a way that could fulfil requirements such as customer satisfaction,
achieving organizational goals and process compatibility with ecosystems (Fuller, 1999).
The concept of green marketing has evolved over time, being delimited three phases:
ecological, environmental and sustainable, which appeared in the late 90s, and revealed
aspects regarding the development of sustainable business (Peattie, 2001).
Green marketing uses the elements of marketing mix - product, price, promotion, and
distribution - in order to provide products and services that ensure ecological advantages
during the entire life cycle of these.
At present, the green marketing is more than just an option, becoming a necessity. In fact,
green marketing is another way of marketing (Morar, 2013) concerning both environmental
protection and consumer health - contributing to economic recovery and sustainable
development.
Green marketing deals with satisfying customers and other stakeholders in a sustainable
way, by integrated efforts of improving the social and environmental responsibility of
organization, products, services, and communication. Therefore, the concept of green
marketing has implications for organizations’ business strategy (Nadaf and Nadaf, 2014), as
a part of corporate strategy (Menon and Menon, 1997).
Applying the ecology principles and implementation of green marketing in organizations is
a necessary condition for ensuring a competitive advantage that refers to the ability of an
organization to earn consistent profits over the competing companies through cost
leadership, differentiation or focus strategy (Porter and Van der Linde, 1995).
A cost leadership strategy requires operational excellence through cost reduction, better use
of funding sources and new models of goods manufacturing or supply. Differentiation
strategies regard brand development, promotion, product positioning on niche markets,
customer satisfaction, so differentiation strategies are identified with business marketing
strategies (Polonski and Rosenberger, 2001). The focus strategy involves obtaining superior
results (profit, profitability) through specific market segments and not by its global
approach (Porter, 1985).
environmental variables and by defining, developing and implementing green marketing
strategies. This is due to the fact that, in terms of demand for "green" products and services,
the green marketing is a key factor for obtaining competitive advantage, while the
effectiveness of environmental actions can lead to avoiding cost increases (Weaver, 1996).
Given the importance of green marketing concept, based on the green marketing strategy
developed by Ginsberg and Bloom (2004) and on a set of research directions, the authors
assessed the implications on competitive advantage when green marketing strategies are
adopted at organization level. Therefore, it was created a new matrix model of choosing a
green marketing strategy that integrates the elements of extended marketing mix (7Ps)
(Booms and Bitner, 1981) and promotes both environmental benefits of products and
sustainable development initiatives of organization, by achieving competitive advantage.
Article framework was a typical one, comprising the introduction, a literature review,
presentation of research methodology and of the results and discussion, while the end was
dedicated to conclusions covering also the limitations and future research directions.
1. Literature review
Organizations that promote green marketing try to move beyond traditional marketing
borders by promoting fundamental values of environment, hoping that customers/users will
associate these values with their organization. The objectives of achieving sustainability for
an environmental oriented organization are closely related to its ability to develop and
implement a “green” marketing approach (Petrescu, 2009).
Green marketing plays an important role in promoting the idea of environmental protection
and sustainable development (Ottman, 2011; Grant, 2007; Peattie and Crane, 2005), from
both perspectives of customer and organization. The green marketing is viewed as a way to
achieve company goals (Keller, 1987), to ensure social responsibility (Davis, 1992;
Freeman and Liedtka, 1991; Shearer, 1990), to meet customer expectations (Lee, 2008;
Delmas and Toffel, 2004; Hoffman, 2001) or to change the whole culture of business
(Carter and Jennings, 2002; Polonsky and Rosenberger, 2001), in a profitable and
sustainable manner (Peattie and Crane, 2005).
The success of green marketing application largely depends on the impact it has on
customers. According to Grant (2007), there are five key points (5 “I”) that enable the
development of an efficient green marketing:
 Intuitive – green products and services should be perceived as normal;
 Integrative – association of trade, technology, social and environmental effects;
 Innovative – achievement of new creative products and new life styles;
 Inviting – organizations must incorporate the strategic objectives of creating an
organizational culture that promotes a “green” lifestyle;
 Informed – the lack of information will affect consumer’s behaviour.
The current economic context and the ecological problems require a redefinition of the
company’s strategies. Thus, the green marketing can contribute to the development of a
new organizational culture in which the environment may be effectively used for the benefit
of companies.
the following premises:
 The environmental component should represent a basic factor in adopting the
marketing decisions (Stoian, 2003) which has to be integrated into all activities of the
organization (Edwards, 2010). Therefore, in designing marketing strategy should be
considered the environmental impact but also the need to meet consumer and organization
specific requirements.
 An approach that regards product whole life cycle (Ottman, 2011; Edwards, 2010).
Green marketing refers specifically to promoting eco products and services, but the
companies involved in this type of marketing must make decisions regarding their products
entire life cycle (processing, packaging and distribution).
 Integration of ecological message in the strategies used to promote goods and
services (Ottman, 2011). The message content, its transparency, transferred information
regarding the green products must be credible arguments for product’s quality.
 Correlation of environmental issues with the primary needs of customers (Ottman,
2011; Singh and Pandey, 2012). By following customer preferences, companies act
responsibly towards the environment, but also strengthen their corporate responsibility
(Edwards, 2010). Therefore, the green marketing strategy should reflect the relation
between the environmental benefits of green products and consumer needs. Compatibility
with ecosystems is not a purpose in itself but it is fulfilled while the objectives of customer
satisfaction and profitability are achieved.
 Integration of competitive advantage for stakeholders’ concept. The choice of green
products at accessible prices and high quality can generate competitive advantages
compared to other consumers of traditional products.
Incorporating the “green” concept into companies is not limited only to the development of
a strategic component focused on environmental issues or simply applying ISO 14000
standards, but involves development of a green marketing strategy to differentiate the
company from its competitors (Grant, 2007). In this context, the implementation of green
marketing in companies is increasingly emerging as a condition and a necessity to ensure
competitive advantages.
The necessity to adopt a green marketing strategy is required by the following aspects
(Sao, 2014):
 Opportunities. Many changes in the economic and environmental fields can be
considered opportunities for organizations to gain competitive advantage over those that do
not promote green marketing policies.
 Government pressure. The government regulations are aimed to protect consumers
and society as a whole, with significant implications in green marketing.
 Competitive pressure. A major force in the area of green marketing is organizations
desire to maintain their competitive advantages. Influences of some organizations may
cause major changes within an industry or on a market, with positive or negative
environmental consequences.
 Social responsibility. In general, the organizations realize that they are members of a
wider community and therefore must adopt a responsible behavior for environment and
integrate this component within their corporate culture.
costs problems or profit issues (e.g. profit maximization without affecting the
environment).
In practice, there is no single strategy that can be applied to all companies, but each chooses
own strategy based on its objectives, resources, target market, market conditions, etc.
(Polonsky and Rosenberger, 2001). In this context, there were initiated and developed
alternative models oriented either to creating or choosing strategies, represented by Grant’s
marketing green grid (2007) and Ginsberg and Bloom’s green marketing strategy matrix
(2004).
As well, should be considered that in order to implement the green marketing strategy at the
level of marketing mix components, Polonsky and Rosenberger (in 2001) underlined the
need for a holistic and integrated approach. Their statement and studies are fully consistent
with the idea that green marketing should be the alternative used by any company to
innovate in a way that can differentiate it from competitors and to ensure the business
success (Grant, 2007). Thus, in order to optimize the economic efficiency of investments,
companies have to create and choose strategies to transform environmental investments into
sources of competitive advantage (Orsato, 2006).
The economic context, but also a specific industry or sector, are determinants of the
development pattern of green marketing strategy for an organization that must target its
interests as well as its’ stakeholders. Also, the development of green marketing strategy
involves integration of innovative elements in the culture and practices of an organization.
2. Research methodology
The potential of green marketing incidence on the business environment reveals the
importance of developing a model for choosing a certain green marketing strategy that can
lead to competitive advantage in terms of profit for organizations and minimal
environmental impact, based on the idea that green marketing strategy requires a holistic
approach which, coordinating all activities of an organization, will integrate environmental
elements within all its functional areas.
On this basis, using and adapting Saunders‘ deductive approach (Saunders et al, 2009), the
authors designed a set of research lines that constituted the foundation of a study which
attempted to assess the influence that green marketing strategies, fully or partially
implemented within the companies, have on achieving competitive advantage.
The research area comprised 34 companies, which in 2012 were among those selected by
Biz Magazine in collaboration with ISRA Center to participate in a study dedicated to
creating a top of green companies based in Romania. Companies that answered the
questionnaire, belonging to a broad spectrum of industries, from retail, mobile and
telecommunications, petroleum, food, soft drinks or cosmetics, are those reporting in their
corporate social responsibility or business reports that they implement and apply
sustainable management practices, green marketing activities or strategies oriented towards
stakeholders’ awareness and environment protection.

 the first level addressed developing a 25 questions questionnaire and processing the
data obtained from participants' answers using SPSS (trial version IBM SPSS Statistics
V.19). The questionnaire was sent by email to participating companies, after they were
previously contacted by phone, aiming to gather responses from employees directly
involved in developing and/or implementing sustainable management practices, green
marketing actions or strategies and corporate social responsibility activities oriented
towards environment protection.
 the second level, the result of data processing, addressed building the matrix model
for choosing the best green marketing strategic alternatives.
The main line of research, which represented the initiation of the questionnaire
development and, subsequently, of the model, was represented by:
DC1: Establishing the way in which organizations can achieve competitive advantage in
terms of using green marketing strategies. In the questionnaire, the questions joined to DC1
were built starting from detailing the process of creating green marketing strategy. The
process was initiated by comprehensively addressing the internal and external factors and
the steps and resources used to base the creation and implementation of green marketing
strategies which contribute to gaining competitive advantage. This line of research has been
assigned 5 questions.
Based on this line of research and in a complementary logic, other lines, targeted and
considering competitive advantage as the main resort of research were represented by:
DC2: Determining the link between green marketing strategies and organizational
performance in terms of competitive advantage. Within the questionnaire, the questions
joined to DC2 were built based on the correlation between a correctly formulated and
coherently implemented green marketing strategy and the financial and non-financial
performances of the company. This line of research has been assigned 4 questions.
DC3: Establishing, in relative terms, the effectiveness of green marketing strategies in
terms of obtaining the competitive advantage. The questions related to DC3 were built
grounded on the specific techniques used to create effective strategies, taking into account
the underlying factors that influence, correlated, gaining competitive advantage. This line
of research has been assigned 4 questions
DC4: Establishing the process course and the results oriented towards creating new green
products (through innovation). Based on the relationship established between innovation
process, its results and competitive advantage, the questions related to DC4 were directed
towards determining the influence that “green” products have on the competitive advantage
of a company. This line of research has been assigned 3 questions.
DC5: Determining the role that "green leaders" play in the creation and development of
green marketing strategies in terms of competitive advantage. The role and involvement of
employees always proved decisive in implementing strategies and achieving competitive
advantage. Thus, the questions related to DC5 addressed especially to those directly
involved in the actions of green strategies, knowledgeable of the specific characteristics
and processes. This line of research has been assigned 3 questions.

Following the course of supply chain, the contribution providers have to gaining
competitive advantage was highlighted by the set of questions which substantiate DC6.
This line of research has been assigned 3 questions.
DC7: Determining the role of “green” partnerships or alliances in achieving company’s
competitive advantage. Organizations often work in partnerships that may prove beneficial,
both strategically and in obtaining competitive advantage. The questions related to DC7
were focused on methods of creating “green” alliances and making them efficient. This line
of research has been assigned 3 questions.
3. Results and discussions
For research substantiation there were assessed two variables, the importance that green
marketing strategy implementation has on competitive advantage, and the influence that
green marketing strategy implementation has within company.
The answers correlated to questions linked to every research lines were given values and ranks
according to the role that the items under scrutiny play in achieving competitive advantage.
Rank 1 was granted if, based on reply given, it was shown that the item exists and is used
for achieving competitive advantage, rank 0.5 if the item is in the process of implementing
or restructuring, and rank 0 if the item is not implemented and there are no plans for its
implementation either. The current status for each company, during research period, was
considered the arithmetic mean of the ranks assigned to each item.
Each company was asked to assess the items correlated to research lines (questions and
their relevance) on a seven-point Likert scale, with the maximum value 7 (high relevance of
the theme that question posed for discussion), and the minimum value 1 (low relevance or
even zero of the theme that question posed for discussion).
As was intended, as the endpoint, to determine the influence green marketing strategy has on
achieving competitive advantage, it was developed correspondence with the strong influence of
green marketing strategy to achieve competitive advantage, namely low or even zero influence.
In the Likert scale, Cronbach Alpha coefficient was applied (Table no. 1a, 1b, 1c) which
assessed the same variable obtained from the answers given, represented by the consistency
of each dimension of the scale, as the indicator of fidelity.
Table no 1a: Analysis of the importance of green marketing strategy
in gaining competitive advantage in terms of loyalty coefficient Cronbach Alpha
Summary of Processing Cases
N
%
Valid Cases
34
100,0
Exclusionsa
0
,0
Total
34
100,0
a. Listwise deletion determined on the basis of used variables
Reliability of Statistics
Cronbach
Cronbach
Number
Alpha
Alpha based on
of elements
standardized items
,783
,770
25

value of 0.7.
As a measure of the instrument reliability, Cronbach Alpha coefficients were calculated for
each research direction, based on results from all 34 participants to the study.
Given that one of the common themes of research areas was the importance the
implementation of green marketing strategies has on the competitive advantage, the result
obtained underlined the fact that the questions were formulated so that to relate to the topic,
endorsed as the objective of questionnaire.
Explaining the result, it can be stated that, based on the given answers, all companies have
admitted the importance that green marketing strategies implementation have in gaining
competitive advantage. However, the variation of Cronbach Alpha coefficient values within
the interval [701, 816] indicates a fluctuating influence of the elements that companies
consider important in the correlation between green marketing strategy and competitive
advantage.
Further, based on the hierarchical classification, using hierarchical clusters method, the
companies involved in the study were grouped into four categories (Table no. 2), depending
on the influence they stated that the implementation of green marketing activities/strategies
has on achieving competitive advantage.
Unlike the importance of implementation, calculated with Cronbach Alpha coefficient, in
terms of influence of implementation, based on the data processed it could be observed
(Table no. 2) that the size of cluster 4 (strong influence) is the lowest related to the other
samples values, and by comparison, the size of cluster 3 (medium influence) is lower than
that of cluster 2 (weak influence). Thus, it can be pointed out that the implementation of
green marketing is made, most often, at the level of strategic activities rather than strategy.
Also, it can be said that in some cases, implementation was, in fact, declarative and not
factual.
Table no. 1b: Statistical analysis of calculated values for the responses to the 25 questions

RI1
RI2
RI3
RI4
RI5
RI6
RI7
RI8
RI9
RI10
RI11
RI12
RI13
RI14
RI15
RI16

916

Average Scale
eliminating an
element
34,36
34,64
34,04
34,96
34,72
34,56
35,32
34,92
33,72
34,68
32,88
33,22
34,67
35,32
33,64
35,04

Scale variation
Element
at eliminating Corrected- Total
an element
correlation
57,657
,649
66,573
,525
58,790
,779
65,707
,519
68,293
,244
77,590
-,094
75,560
,031
65,243
,403
59,127
,577
65,810
,460
55,860
,705
56,012
,550
65,222
,398
75,560
,031
65,573
,510
59,720
,783

Multiple
Cronbach Alpha
harmonized
at eliminating
correlation
an element
,800
,738
,865
,760
,907
,727
,554
,759
,774
,790
,699
,816
,532
,799
,619
,770
,637
,748
,666
,764
,712
,729
,600
,720
,592
,750
,532
,799
,812
,740
,916
RI2
RI3
RI4
RI5
RI6
RI7
RI8
RI9
RI10
RI17
RI18
RI19
RI20
RI21
RI22
RI23
RI24
RI25

Average Scale
eliminating an
element
34,36
34,64
34,04
34,96
34,72
34,56
35,32
34,92
33,72
34,68
34,96
34,72
32,61
36,32
35,92
34,12
34,68
31,88
33,22

Scale variation
Element
at eliminating Corrected- Total
an element
correlation
57,657
,649
66,573
,525
58,790
,779
65,707
,519
68,293
,244
77,590
-,094
75,560
,031
65,243
,403
59,127
,577
65,810
,460
65,707
,519
68,293
,244
74,590
-,074
75,590
,060
66,243
,503
60,127
,591
65,810
,460
50,860
,671
56,012
,550

Multiple
Cronbach Alpha
harmonized
at eliminating
correlation
an element
,800
,738
,865
,760
,907
,727
,554
,759
,774
,790
,699
,816
,532
,799
,619
,770
,637
,748
,666
,764
,554
,759
,774
,790
,620
,801
,553
,812
,719
,807
,663
,766
,666
,764
,700
,701
,600
,720

Table no. 1c: Scalar statistical values
Mean
37,88

Variation
77,110

Std. deviation
8,781

Number of elements
25

Table no. 2: Classifying companies by category

Elements
Size of used sample %

Cluster 1:
influence 0
1 (0.0)
3.5%

Cluster 2:
weak influence
3.32 (0.48)
37.2%

Cluster 3:
medium influence
3.78 (0.67)
32.8%

Cluster 4:
strong influence
4.12 (0.72)
26.4%

These results and observations were considered as scientific reasons to developing a matrix
model for choosing green marketing strategic alternatives that can lead to gaining
competitive advantage by companies in terms of profit and minimal environmental impact.
In the study, it was observed that the companies included in clusters 3 and 4, which
implement strategies, models and theories of green marketing, differentiate from
competitors. Also, their production lines frameworks are closely related to the
implementation of environmental standards (such as ISO 14000). From these views, the
authors could maintain that each stage of production cycle and the links between these
stages, through green marketing, will lead to achieving added value, thereby generating
competitive advantage.
The model developed was based on the correlation that can be established among the
generic strategies of competitive advantage (Porter, 1985), the elements of extended
marketing mix (7Ps) (Booms and Bitner, 1981) and the matrix of green marketing strategy
(Ginsberg and Bloom, 2004). The three instruments were chosen as they provide the
complete set of variables making up the foundation required to build a model for choosing
green marketing strategy in light of all internal and external influencing factors.
stated that green marketing strategies that constitute the matrix must be determined
according to the extent and importance that green market has both within the branch where
an organization operates and within the specific organization and according to
organization’s ability to differentiate its products or services depending on the level of
attention and importance given to “green” activities and results. Although the matrix has
proven to be a supportive mean for those organizations that use particular strategies in order
to include green marketing within their marketing plans, to state and accept it as sufficient
for use and generalization it is an error.

High
DEFENSIVE
GREEN
Z II

UNIFORM
GREEN
Z III

Substantiality
of green market
segments

EXTREME
GREEN
ZI

MODERATE
GREEN
Z IV

Low
Low

Differentiability according to
green approach

High

Figure no. 1: Matrix of Green Marketing
Source: Ginsberg and Bloom, 2004
According to Ginsberg and Bloom, Extreme Green strategy fully includes within product
and business life cycles, the environmental issues. The ecologic approach has accompanied
companies’ activities since their initiation and release. The activities and practices of those
companies that implement Extreme Green strategy include the approaches to prices
establishment at the level of product life cycle, total quality management of the
environment and production focused on environment and its protection. In some cases, they
may also be focused on dedicated small markets and on selling their products or providing
their services through exclusive stores or specialized distribution channels.
Using Moderate Green strategy, companies invest in long-term processes systemically
addressed and oriented towards green marketing, that require financial as well as material
and human effort and involvement. These companies consider competitive advantage as the
result and the effect of creating ecological approached products and services. Although,
based on their place on the market and relation with competitors, companies have the
ability to differentiate themselves by means of ecological approach, of environmental
protection, they do not do this often, trying to gain the competitive advantage with other
factors. Although using the main channels of promotion and distribution, the environmental
opportunities and benefits that accompany a product or service are presented and promoted
in the background.
given to a crisis or to competitors’ actions. Companies implementing this strategy try to
strengthen their image and to reduce, or even eliminate, the negative effects of their
activities for they know that green market segments are a good win, they are important and
profitable, and they should not be given up or lost. Because these companies do not have
the ability to differentiate from their competitors using green marketing focused actions,
promotion and advertising activities dedicated to these actions are sporadic and brief,
although sustained. In terms of promotion, the companies implementing Defensive Green
strategy will implement either activities of sponsoring small ecological events or programs
or, where appropriate, they will protect themselves by means of specific measures in case
of unfavourable campaigns. Large promotion campaigns focused on highlighting
environmental actions will be launched and funded only if the companies have identified a
substantial competitive advantage that can be obtained as a result of these campaigns.
The last strategy, Uniform Green is applied to those companies which, although
characterized by a socially responsible behavior, do not make public their actions focused
on green or ecologic marketing. These are oriented towards reducing costs and improving
the efficiency of various activities by means of those initiatives that seek to protect the
environment, albeit competitive advantage is not affected by them. Although the companies
that implement Uniform Green strategy observe environmental laws and regulations
formally imposed, they admit that the financial benefits cannot be acquired from the green
market segments. The feature of these companies is the backward step taken in terms of
promoting products, services or activities that protect the environment from the perspective
of a too high standard that may be imposed on them.
Based on this ground, it can be maintained that choosing one of the strategies outlined
above could be made depending on the four controllable variables of marketing mix and on
the way the variables can influence and be used by each strategy.
However, given the whole current gamut of markets, the new trends of environmental
factors’ evolution, which influence the businesses, the ways and components that influence
gaining competitive advantage, to stop only at the four elements of the marketing mix
would be a decrease in understanding and of the opportunities to choose the best green
marketing strategy. Therefore, the model built based on the research carried out has brought
and used, as the first novelty, the implementation of the extended marketing mix (Booms
and Bitner, 1981), of all 7 verifiable variables that, in full view, are directed towards both
products and services and that, in addition to the 4 variables adds three more, represented
by people (personnel/stakeholders), process and physical evidence. The influences that
every variable of the extended marketing mix has in choosing one of the four strategies are
presented in Table no. 3.
Based on correlations between green marketing strategies and the variables of extended
marketing mix, the authors noticed that it can be determined the importance and the place a
strategy can fill within the activities of a company, the impact that marketing mix variables
have on selecting a strategy as well as the mutual influence, exercised by the chosen green
strategy on these variables.

Zone I
Extreme Green

Zone II
Zone III
Zone IV
Defensive Green Uniform Green Moderate Green

Product
v
v
v
v
Price
v
v
Place
v
Promotion
v
v
v
People (personnel/
v
v
v
v
stakeholders)
Process
v
v
v
v
Physical Evidence
v
v
v
(tangibility)
Source: Ginsberg and Bloom, 2004; Booms and Bitner, 1981 and own concept

Thus, it was seen that (Table no. 3) Extreme Green strategy (Zone I), which aims at
achieving competitive advantage based on green activities, uses and is influenced in turn by
the whole set of extended marketing mix variables. A company that implements this
strategy will have to manufacture more environmentally friendly products, “greener” than
competitors, which will not pollute with the waste they produce and will possess ecological
quality features, while the manufacturing processes of these products to be implemented
focusing on green marketing. The price is an influencing factor, for part of it is used as a
source of investment for ecological activities. The placement is materialized using
distribution systems and suppliers/distributors whose businesses are characterized by green
marketing focus. Promotion addresses own products and processes, as well as company’s
distributors and suppliers, focusing on their ecological and environmental protection
features. In addition, people (personnel/stakeholders) participate in producing the green
products, providing green services and in purchasing them based on their ecological trait.
Last, nut not least, in respect of services, the physical evidence of their supply is taken into
consideration from the perspective of the way they influence, positively or negatively, the
environment.
Similarly, the Moderate Green strategy (Zone IV) is influenced and emphasizes the
ecological factor, both through promotion and specific design, development and
manufacturing the product or providing the service activities (production/supply) as well as
pricing activities, as long as expenses efficiency can be influenced by environmental factor.
The importance given to place is reduced due to the fact that companies implementing this
strategy use the main distribution channels which are, themselves, concerned about
environmental issues.
On the other hand, Defensive Green strategy (Zone II), aims to create, design and
manufacture products and provide services whose creation and use do not affect the
environment. Promotion activities play an important role, though they are not characterized
by specific expenditures oriented towards the aggressive advertising of company’s
ecological approach.
The last strategy, Uniform Green (Zone III), strictly regards creating, designing and
manufacturing the product or providing the service without any influence from the other
variables of the extended marketing mix.

results and risks of implementing the activities addressing the ecological approach, while
the attitude of the last two strategies is a defensive one, whereby companies make minimum
effort aimed at addressing the ecologic, environmental protection approach, to only avoid
any risky and negative consequences.
Based on the evidence that marketing strategy is part of the company's strategy, by the
means of developed matrix model it was intended to expand the correlations between the
examined variables so that the generalization degree and the adaptability capacity of the
model components according to organizational structures and features of various companies
can allow to easily choose and implement the optimal strategy/strategies.
In the new matrix model (Figure no. 2), the reduced costs were considered to include also
two main variables of differentiation for choosing the best strategic alternative, represented
by the cost of implementing strategic alternative of green marketing and the cost of
implementing company’s strategy. By extension and connecting the components of
Ginsberg and Bloom (2004) and Porter (1985) matrices, throughout the new matrix model
for choosing the optimal green marketing strategy, the discussion was conducted and the
observations were made at the level of component zones.
Strategic advantage
Customer perception unicqueness
Reduced costs
Low
High
High
High

Substantiality
of green market
segments

Z II a
Z II b
Defensive Green
Differentiation
(high costs)

ZIb
ZIa
Extreme Green
Leadership by low
cost

Strategic Target
Z III a
Z III b
Uniform Green
Focus on
differentiation

Z IV b

Differentiability on green approach

Z IV a

Moderate Green
Focus on costs

Market level

Low

Low
Low

Industry level

High

Figure no. 2: Matrix Model for Choosing Optimal Green Marketing Strategy
Source: own concept adapted from Ginsberg and Bloom, 2004; Porter, 1985

Assuming that for a company, in the current market and competitive contexts, to choose,
implement and set up objectives, activities and stages based only on a single green
marketing strategy would be an error, each zone was considered likely to have a high and
an average degree of choosing a specific strategy according to various factors that influence
the company at a certain time, and according to which the optimal strategy of green
marketing will be chosen. Thus, in Figure no. 2, “a” zones are specific to a high/strict

by a moderate degree and actions bridging the elements of the most appropriate strategies
that a company can choose from green marketing perspective.
Zone I - the strategies of this zone are oriented towards gaining a high competitive
advantage through costs leadership (low cost) and an industry approach. Also, companies
are placed within a zone where the substantiation of green market segments and the
differentiability due to the focus on environment protection approach have a high degree of
evidence and impact. Thus, a company that chooses and implements Extreme Green
strategy, either alone or conjuncted with elements of the strategies from adjoining zones,
can influence the industry to which it belongs by special intervention on the environment
and by low costs. In addition, based on the relationship with the variables of extended
marketing mix, the full set of variables will be used to and will be influenced by the
implementation of Extreme Green strategy.
Zone II - strategies of this area are characterized by a shift towards a low competitive
advantage due to the differentiation by high costs and the industry approach. The company
that implements this strategy may influence the industry to which it belongs only through
preventive action, as feedback to external actions, and by low costs allocated. Also, based
on the relationship with extended marketing mix variables, those participating in and being
influenced by Defensive Green strategy implementation, are represented by product,
promotion, people, process and physical evidence.
Zone III – the strategies specific to this zone are characterized by approaching competitive
advantage from a diminished perspective due to focusing on differentiation through high
costs and market level approach. The company that implements a strategy specific to this
zone influences to a little extent and at a small-scale the market segment to which it
belongs. The influences have the magnitude of rarely occurring activities, and a strong
feature oriented towards environment. Focusing on differentiation will increase the costs of
implementing the Uniform Green strategy. Extended marketing mix variables involved in
and which will be affected by the implementation of Uniform Green strategy are
represented by product, people and process.
Zone IV - specific strategies are characterized by a consistent competitive advantage due to
the focus on lower costs and to market segment approach. The companies framed in this
area can greatly influence the market segment to which they belong, by clear guidance on
environment protection activities, thereby achieving an important competitive advantage.
Focusing on low cost locates them at the level of a small scale strategic goal. This also
influences the extended marketing mix variables, which are involved in and will be
influenced by the implementing of Moderate Green strategy, represented by product,
price, promotion, people, process and physical evidence.
Based on the conducted analysis and on the presentation of each zone characteristics, there
could be highlighted the following aspects:
 the most advantageous zones (in terms of extended marketing mix variables and of
cost variables) for both an organization and the environment influenced by it, are zones I a
and IV a. In both cases, the Extreme Green strategy, respectively Moderate Green, lead to
gaining competitive advantage, both in terms of overall company’s business and the
activities dedicated to environmental protection.

represented by II a and III a. In these cases, the implementation of Defensive Green
strategy, respectively Uniform Green will result in low competitive advantage. However,
there are organizations that will implement the strategies according to the pursued strategic
target.
 on this basis and taking into account that, at some point, under current circumstances
of rapidly changing social, economic, and natural environment, choosing only one strategy
may be deficient for any organization, the zones of moderate influence thus justify their
importance. Choosing strategies according to them being part of I b and IV b zones, and
accepting positive influences in terms of an increased competitive advantage, from the
strategies in II b and III b zones, may prove to be beneficial solutions in these
circumstances.
Therefore, the new developed model justifies its applicability by the complex and current
approach of choosing the optimal strategic alternative, taking into account that companies
relate Porter's generic strategies with the variables of extended marketing mix in order to
implement new strategies to achieve competitive advantage in terms of green marketing
and sustainable development.

Conclusions
The capability that green marketing has in influencing business environment emphasized
the importance of building a matrix model for choosing green marketing strategy certainly
ensuring obtaining competitive advantage in terms of company’s profit and minimal impact
on the environment.
The study conducted on a sample of 34 companies that implement green marketing
strategies or actions pointed out that they are differing from competitors and they structure
their production lines closely related to environmental protection actions. From this
perspective, one can state that each stage of manufacturing and the ties between these
stages, by means of green marketing, will lead to achieving the added value, thereby
generating competitive advantage.
The new model developed was based on the correlation that can be established among the
generic strategies of competitive advantage, the extended elements of marketing mix (7Ps)
and the matrix of green marketing strategy.
The matrix model created was intended to expand the correlations among considered
variables in order to select and implement the optimal strategy taking into consideration
generalization degree and adaptability capacity of model components according to
company’s structure and features.
In the current events of increasing competition and the need to gain competitive advantage,
the new matrix model can be a useful tool, applicable and adaptable to all organizations
intending to use the benefits of implementing green marketing strategies. Thus, according
to the research results, there were delineated several advantages, coupled with the technical
and economic components of the current business environment.

on the one hand, facilitates the choice of strategies because organizations will have
available a larger number of indicators and variables to choose their strategies from and to
easily adapt their ways of conducting their activities.
On the other hand, the new matrix provides organizations with more zones of framing and
choosing strategies. Each of the 4 initial zones has, in the new matrix, two more new zones,
increasing their number to 8 and 3 variables, represented by the components of extended
marketing mix, and the reduced costs variable with the cost of implementing strategic
alternative of green marketing and the cost of implementing company’s strategy, that
contribute to the assessment of strategic options.
In terms of connection with the current economic environment, the new matrix model
for choosing the green marketing strategies is based on scientific, objective grounds, using
as a working foundation Porter’ generic competitive strategies, correlated with the model
created by Ginsberg and Bloom, dedicated to green marketing strategies. The correlation
established by the new model provides an objective and impartial way of selecting the
strategies, incorporated into the reality of the environment where the company acts, sets up
and builds its strategies.
The main limitations of the research in terms of building the model were generated mainly
by the small number of companies involved and, to a lesser extent, by the validity of data
some companies provided, taking into consideration the declarative nature of some strategic
actions carried out in green marketing area. These limitations will be the point of initiation
for further research that will have as objective a larger number of companies involved in
green marketing strategies implementation and application.

