




 Emission to land, e.g., pesticides and fertilizers, metal emissions to land,

radioactive waste
 Resource use, e.g., water use and abstraction, minerals, forestry
In various countries, regulatory bodies enforce recovery of product packaging [4]. A
number of automotive industries have introduced product take back, recycling and reuse policies [5]. The introduction of green strategies for environmental management
bears a significant impact on the choice and successful implementation of a performance measurement system. In this connection, it can be seen that linking specific green
strategies to appropriate performance measurement systems is a serious challenge to
most supply chain decision makers. Precisely, the implementation of green strategies
requires changes in performance management in one or more of the following problem
areas [1,6]:
 Procurement policies: New environmental performance requirements often demand

significant modifications in materials and supply procedures;
 Product technology: The introduction of new environmental targets often demands

new product structure in relation to design, components, and materials;
 Process technology: Environmental strategies often require new technologies, e.g.,

closed-loop and cleaner technologies with reduced environmental impact;
 Logistics and distribution: Environmental policies may require new ways of

managing physical flows of goods and collaboration with other players in the supply
chain.
Remarkable extant studies on the strategic importance of green issues and green performance management systems (PMS) are vast [1,2,7-10]. Most researchers and practitioners have focused their attention on two major study areas, namely (i) analysis of
green strategies available to supply chain managers and ways of enhancing strategy formulation [1,2], and (ii) development of frameworks for assessing organizational environmental performance based on physical indicators [4], environmental costs [11], and
life-cycle assessment methods [7]. Gunasekaran et al. [8] investigated issues concerned
with current practices in supply chain performance measurement systems, providing
insights into the future requirements in supply chain performance measurement. The
main issues discussed include (i) the need for organization-wide and supply-chain-wide
integration and coordination; (ii) the need for every metric to take a supply chain perspective in order to monitor performance effectively; (iii) the need for a common goal
upon which each entity in the supply chain is measured and improved; and (iv) the
need for designing additional new indicators, non-financial and financial, to cater for
new developments in the supply chain context. As pointed out by Brewer and Speh [9],
there are a number of concerns associated with the development and application of
performance measurement systems across the entire supply chain. Some of these issues
are outlined as follows [9]:
 Lack of understanding: Managers that are focused on internal systems find it

difficult to understand the importance of multi-organizational performance


 Lack of control: Most organizations and decision makers prefer to be evaluated on

indicators they can control; without sufficient supply chain collaboration, the
management and control of inter-organizational indicators is complex;
 Different goals and objectives: Organizations have different goals and objectives,
therefore would argue on the selection of performance indicators;
 Lack of standardized performance indicators: In most supply chains, there are no
agreed-upon performance measures in terms of units to use, structure, and format; and
 Difficulty in linking measures to stakeholder value: Linking measures to stakeholder
or customer value and environmental issues is becoming more and more complex.
Besides the above-mentioned body of literature and the issues arising, there is continual research activity in the development and application of performance measurement
and management systems, for both conventional and green supply chain systems. This
demonstrates the ever-increasing importance of developing the right PMS system for
the right supply chain. Surprisingly, most of these studies tend to propose these PMS
from a general point of view [1,2,7]. On the contrary, the main benefit of this study is
that it proposes green performance management frameworks that will be able to assist
managers to know how to evaluate their organizational green performance taking into
consideration both the constraints of their supply chain network, organizational pressures, and objectives of the business.
Also in spite of growing literature on these issues, little attention has been paid to
the design and implementation of environmental performance measurement systems
that take into account the specific context of green strategies, from a taxonomic view
point. The concerns pointed out above stem from the fact that there are a number of
green strategies and performance management tools and systems that can be applied in
different contexts of the green supply chain strategies used. Moreover, different firms
have different organizational objectives and capabilities. As such, the development of
an appropriate performance system, given the right green strategy, is not a trivial task.
In view of these issues, the design of a carefully defined framework for the development
of effective performance measurement systems is imperative. Most of the frameworks
in the green supply chain literature simply classify green strategies into reactive and
proactive strategies, which is rather too broad [7,8,10].
Numerous extant studies dealt with traditional supply chain performance metrics
without consideration of the environmental performance. The traditional supply chain
only deals with indicators associated with cost, time, quality, and flexibility [8-10,12].
On the contrary, green supply chain performance management focuses on metrics concerned with green image and environmental issues [10]. With the advent of environmental concerns associated with manufacturing operations, the metrics and indicators
for supply chain performance management have been expanded significantly. Given the
wide scope of the possible metrics and the variety of supply chain strategies that can be
implemented, a guiding framework is essential for effective understanding of performance measurement systems, specifically for the green supply chain.
In light of these issues, our approach seeks to provide a more detailed taxonomic
analysis of performance measurement, deriving from our contributions on strategic
green supply chain management (GSCM) and PMSs. As such, this study goes a step


specific performance measures. The study presents a taxonomic contingency framework which examines how different green strategies may be implemented and assessed
in the context of specific PMSs. The specific objectives of this work are as follows:
(1) To perform a survey of case studies on green supply chain strategies and
performance management systems;
(2) To develop a taxonomy of green strategies by analyzing the key drivers behind the
adoption of specific green strategies;
(3) To develop an integrated framework for performance management for the green
supply chain; and
(4) To suggest the most effective PMS metrics for the green supply chain, promoting
understanding of green performance management systems.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The next section provides an overview
of the research methodology and followed by the section which presents the results of
literature search survey. An outline of green supply chain practices is presented in the
fourth section. This is followed by a taxonomy of GSCM strategies in the fifth section.
A framework for developing PMS is presented in the sixth section. Finally, concluding
remarks and further research prospects are presented in the last section.

Research methodology
Green supply chain success indicators are quantifiers which are used in assessing the
efficiency and effectiveness of green supply chain management practices. These indicators tend to vary between companies and industries, depending on their priorities and
the focus of the performance criteria. The research methodology employed in this work
considers existing empirical studies in the literature and seeks to coin a guiding platform for developing PMS in the context of specific green strategies. In this regard, the
study consists of four phases, from literature survey through to framework development, as shown in Figure 1.
The first phase focuses on carrying out a literature search survey of real-world case
studies on green practices and the implementation of relevant performance indicators.
The aim is to figure out the drivers behind the implemented green practice and their
influence on the performance indicators selected. The empirical studies were obtained
through a wide search in academic studies, databases, and bibliographical lists so as to
obtain the relevant information. Thus, the search was selected from published work in
reputable journals, concerned with the implementation of green manufacturing strategies, such as Sustainability, Journal of Remanufacturing, International Journal of
Production Economics, International Journal of Operations and Production Management, Supply Chain Management, Benchmarking: An International Journal, and Journal
of Cleaner Production. The search criteria used included keywords such as ‘green
practices’, ‘green strategies’, ‘green supply chain’, ‘environmental issues’, ‘ecological’,
‘green supply chain performance measurement’, ‘performance indicators’ and ‘performance
metrics’. The second phase highlights the critical areas of focus of each case study in order
to determine the major driving elements behind the implementation of GSCM strategies.
This would assist in answering questions as to why certain strategies are suitable for


Figure 1 Research methodology.

industrial context. The third phase seeks to highlight green performance metrics chosen
and the drivers behind the metrics chosen under different contexts of the case studies.
The fourth and final phase aims to develop a generic framework for selecting the most appropriate PMS metrics for specific GSCM strategy.
In the next section, a summary of the outcome of the literature search survey is
outlined.

Results of the search survey
The literature search survey indicated that some of the major contributors in the literature relevant to GSCM and PMS were Hart [13,14] and Porter and Van der Linde [15].
Other researchers in the area include Azzone and Noci [1], Kumar and Yamaoka [5],
and Azzone et al. [6]. Following the literature search process, further perusal of selected
publications also indicated that a number of organizations have embarked on introducing green practices. Some of these practices are green procurement, green product design, green production or manufacturing processes, green distribution, recycling and
remanufacturing. For instance, Wal-Mart adopted green procurement of biodegradable
and/or recyclable packaging. Automotive companies such as Toyota and Ford require
ISO 14000 certification for their suppliers. Furthermore, it was realized that a number
of firms have invested in recycling and reuse practices, for instance, Dell, Hewlett
Packard, Toshiba and other electronics industries [16,17]. A number of legislations and
regulatory systems are being put in place by governments and concerned stakeholders
to account for environmental performance. In Western Europe, there is an obligation
for 100% collection on ‘white goods’ [18]. The general acceptance of green activities
has led to increasing empirical studies on the external and internal factors leading to
the uptake of green practices and their impact on organizational performance [19]. Interesting results were also obtained with regard to the common trends in the development of performance measurement and management systems.
Table 1 provides a summary of the main areas of focus identified from the existing
empirical studies investigated in this study. A closer look at the results of the literature


Page 6 of 20

performance, and (3) improving the firm's green image by promoting green initiatives
that contribute towards the firm's social responsibility over the well-being of the society
and its environment. The focus areas explain the need for developing performance indicators associated with each area. To measure, manage and control these areas of
focus, it is crucial to establish appropriate performance indicators, and to put in place
the necessary green strategies to enhance achievement of the desired goals within the
respective areas. In retrospect, we can somewhat conveniently classify the performance
indicators into the following:
(1) Environmental performance
(2) Economic or financial performance
(3) Social performance
Further explanations to the performance indicators in each of the above-mentioned
category will be discussed in the ‘Developing green PMS metrics’ section. However, it is
important to take a closer look at the green practices behind the focus areas.

Green supply chain management practices
In as much as several researchers have investigated the concepts of greening the environment at strategic and operational levels, many related researchers have studied
greening practices, such as green product design [39,40], green process design [15,41],
green purchasing [42] and green manufacturing practices at large [16,43,44]. From
these greening concepts, the environmentally conscious practices, and the motive for
organizational competitiveness, GSCM can be defined as follows:

GSCM ¼ Green Purchasing þ Green Manufacturing þ Green Distribution
þ Green Reverse Logistics
Figure 2 shows the green practices in a closed loop green supply chain. Supply chain
players such as used parts warehouses/storages, waste collectors, recycle plants, final

Table 1 Identified empirical studies on the GSCM performance
Area of focus
1. Environmental performance

Performance metrics

Reference source
[1,20-24]
[7,8,11,21,22,24-26]

Solid waste or hazardous materials

[21,22,27-32]

Energy usage or consumption
2. Economic performance

Air emissions
Waste water or water pollution

[21,22,29,33,34]

Reverse logistics costs

[24,35-38]

Sustainability costs

[8,11,23,26,37]

Energy consumption costs
3. Social responsibility performance

Green image

[8,23,26,27,29,30]

Customer perspective
Percent recycling


Figure 2 Activities in green closed-loop green supply chain.

treatment (landfill) and other stakeholders are involved in carrying out these green
activities.
Green purchasing practices

These are concerned with purchasing environmentally friendly materials and products,
certification of potential suppliers, total quality environmental management (pollution
prevention, internal performance measurement and auditing), environmentally friendly
packaging and distribution [42]. Material recovery, reuse, and recycling are put in place
so that all purchasing procedures satisfy environmental quality standards [45-47].
Green manufacturing practices

Green manufacturing defines efficient product design and production processes that
use inputs with low environmental impacts, capable of producing minimal or no waste
nor pollution [39,40]. Green product design ensures that the number of components in
a product is minimized, assembly and disassembly processes are simplified, and material recovery, reuse and recycling are enhanced. In addition, green manufacturing consists of environmentally friendly processes that minimize raw material usage, energy
usage, wastes, and emissions. The end result of green (re)manufacturing is reduced material costs, energy costs, occupational safety expenses, as well as improved production
efficiency and corporate image.
Green distribution practices

Green distribution involves the application of green packaging practices that encourage
the use of standard downsized packaging, recyclable materials, returnable packaging
methods, and promotion programs on recycling and reuse [46,47]. In addition, green
distribution encourages the use of energy-efficient distribution methods that minimize
energy usage, carbon emissions, and transportation costs.
Green reverse logistics

Green reverse logistics is the process of retrieving the product materials or parts from


waste collection, parts collection, inspection, selection, sorting, direct recovery, reprocessing, redistribution, and disposal [49,50]. Recovering products, refurbishing goods,
and salvaging parts such as precious metals that can be recycled or reused can bring a
huge benefit to the environment and to the manufacturer [50,51].
In light of the above, the choice and the success of these green practices depend on
the strategies and capabilities of an organization. We present a taxonomic analysis of
green strategies in the next section.

GSCM strategies
The adoption of green strategies has a far-reaching and multi-dimensional impact on
performance [1]. In particular, the introduction of GSCM strategies may result in (i)
management complexities due to changes in logistics for product recovery and
recycling, leading to (ii) multiple changes in performance measurement, and in the
management of operations at large. It is therefore imperative to identify the conditions under which these strategies are best implemented, and to analyze the
performance measurement systems in light of the specific green strategies [45]. A
question then arises as to what influences the selection and implementation of green
strategies.
Drivers behind green supply chain strategies

The environmental awareness of an organization will influence the perspective from
which green strategies are developed [45]. In the absence of environmental awareness, an organization adopts a naive perspective where the enterprise takes no initiatives towards improving environmental performance. In this work, two categories
of GSCM drivers are identified: internal and external drivers. Internal drivers are
as follows:
 Eco-efficiency perspective: Green strategies are developed with the objective of

reducing wastes and resource usage, while maximizing environmental performance
[52];
 Competitive advantage perspective: Green strategies are used as means of
attaining a competitive advantage through product and process technology
innovation [53];
 Ecological and ethical perspective: Green strategies are driven by the desire to
reduce the industrial impact on the natural environment, rather than by the desire
to improve on economic performance [51,54].
Various researchers have identified total quality control, cost control, communities
and environmental regulations as the main drivers behind an organization's environmental perspective [45-48,55,56]. However, from a broader view, the influence of such
factors depends on a combination of factors at industry, country and even global levels.
In addition to the above-mentioned internal drivers, we further identify the following
external drivers:
 Compliance perspective: The need to comply with current environmental



 Supply chain relationship: Supply chain collaboration and relationship will always

influence the company's environmental behavior. For example, automotive
companies require ISO 14000 certification for their suppliers.
 Green pressures: ‘Green’ movements arising from customers and other stakeholders
lead to a widespread adoption of green strategies across the supply chain.
The drivers (internal and external) highlighted above are vital for the analysis of
green supply chain strategies. In our investigation, it was observed that the selection of
green strategies depends largely on a combination of internal and external drivers. For
instance, a firm which is highly concerned with ecological and ethical responsibilities,
located in a collaborative supply chain environment tends to choose closed-loop supply
chain strategies (see Figure 3).
The green supply chain strategies

In view of the above internal and external drivers, we distinguish four major categories
of GSCM strategies:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Compliance-cantered,
Lean-based,
Innovation-cantered, and
Closed-loop strategies.

Of the four green strategies, compliance-centered is the most basic with the closedloop strategy being the most complex. The adoption of the compliance-centered strategy is mostly due to external pressures while the implementation of the remaining
three is mostly due to internal drivers. Organizations can thus start adoption of GSCM
practices starting from the compliance-centered strategy and moving on to adopt the
remaining strategies in turn until finally adopting the closed-loop strategy. Should any
organization choose to fully implement a higher level green strategy, some of the green
practices pertaining to lower strategies have to be implemented, as the starting point.
In terms of performance measurement of each strategy, the higher level strategies contain all the performance indicators from the lower level strategies. In other words,
adoption of the lean-based strategy allows the firm to also meet the requirements of
the compliance-centered strategy.



Compliance-centered strategy

This strategy is adopted in response to environmental regulations, pressures from customers and other stakeholders such as government and green pressure groups [57].
Companies may be obliged to adopt international standard systems such as ISO 14001
[50], and purchasing contracts with suppliers aimed at meeting certain regulatory requirements. The strategy is mainly adopted by companies whose main objective is to
comply with the requirements of their stakeholders, as a way of getting permission to
do business (regulatory compliance) and qualifying to do business with relevant organizations (inter-organizational compliance). Companies adopting compliance-centered
strategy are reactive to events and tend to view changes needed for compliance as a
burden. Typically, these companies' investment to the greening of the supply chain is
minimal [48]. The compliance-centered strategy is the most basic of the GSCM strategies and it is therefore the natural starting point for GSCM strategy implementation,
and it requires minimal customer-supplier engagement.
Lean-based strategy

This is a more complex GSCM strategy normally adopted by organizations that focus
on eco-efficiency or lean and green approach to GSCM. With this strategy, additional
to meeting the requirements of the compliance-centered strategy, suppliers are required to satisfy certain operation-based efficiency targets. The strategy thus links environmental performance with operational efficiency through waste minimization and
optimal resource usage [19,44]. The environmental performance benefits from this
strategy arise from the adoption of specific manufacturing practices which are focused
on resource use reduction and waste minimization, and in so doing also provide secondary environmental performance benefits. The lean-based strategy requires higher
levels of customer-supplier engagement and it ties environmental performance to operational processes in the supply chain. To ensure economic benefits, all firms participating in the supply chain have to adopt lean-based operational process. This strategy is
widely implemented within the automotive industry where automakers expect their
suppliers to adopt sustainable lean-based operational processes, which are focused on
waste minimization and resource use reduction.
Innovation-centered strategy

This is adopted by companies whose objective is to keep up-to-date with changes in
environmental regulations through specialized technologies, product designs, processes and strict green performance standards [16,50]. The strategy requires organizations to adopt a product life-cycle perspective when developing their products, and
give stricter environmental requirements to their suppliers. The organizations adopting this strategy routinely support their suppliers to modify their operational processes in order to meet the requirements of the newest environmental regulations.
Participating organizations integrate specific relevant green activities, such as green
design and green purchasing in order to improve current processes and product development. The strategy compels organizations to cultivate innovative capabilities to
GSCM practices. Customer-supplier engagement is higher than that in lean-based


Closed-loop strategy

This strategy is adopted by firms in highly collaborative supply chains where companies
can keep abreast with complex requirements of closed-loop supply chain and to integrate with suppliers, from design to product take-back [59]. Material recovery, recycling
and remanufacturing improve environmental performance of the entire supply chain
[24,36]. This strategy is the most complex and collaborative type of GSCM strategy. It
targets eco-efficiency achieved by the management of all processes in the supply chain
that focuses on customer service level, which covers from raw materials to product delivery to customers, through design, procurement, production, distribution, use, reuse
and disposal, product take-back, reverse logistics, including aspects such as reduction
of time and resource use, costs and environmental impacts.
The strategy thus links the environmental performance to the entire supply chain
activities and allows the integration of business goals pertaining to economic and operational performance, social performance and environmental performance. Organizations adopting this strategy require high levels of control over the capture and return
of used materials. Of the four GSCM strategies, the closed-loop strategy requires the
highest level of customer-supplier engagement. An example of companies adopting this
strategy is Toyota Motor Corporation and its suppliers [60]. As an example, to increase
its vehicle recycling performance, Toyota formulated the Toyota Recycling Vision in
2003, whose target is to achieve a vehicle recovery rate of 95% by 2015. The company
achieved the target ahead of time in 2007, and went on to achieve a vehicle recycling
rate of 99% in 2011 [61].

Developing PMS for the green supply chain
To develop an effective green PMS for the green supply chain, the decision maker
needs a guide or framework for developing the PMS and for identifying appropriate
green performance indicators. There are four basic requirements that should be considered when developing an effective performance measurement system that can support
green supply chain performance [1]:
 Strategic focus: the ability of the PMS system to account for the long-term impacts;
 Measurability: the ease of measurement, to enable assessment of green efficiency;
 Completeness: ability of the PMS to account for all relevant performance

indicators;
 Timeliness: the amount of time taken by the PMS to collect and analyze the
performance related data.
To effectively meet these requirements, there are critical areas of concern which supply
chain decision makers should focus on. As identified from various empirical studies in the
literature, critical success factors for every PMS in a green supply chain include (i) top
management commitment, (ii) the availability of diagnosis tools, (iii) the ability to formulate an appropriate action plan deriving from the findings of the diagnosis, (iv) the availability of suitable performance measurement indicators, and (v) the availability of a
performance management system for performance monitoring and improvement. The
commitment of top management is imperative; this essentially calls for an establishment


not forgetting the concerned operational managers. In addition, the availability of appropriate diagnosis tools is essential for quantitative and qualitative measurement of the supply chain performance. Deriving from the findings from diagnosis and analysis activities,
appropriate action plans can then be formulated. However, to enable the supply chain decision maker to evaluate and monitor performance and effectiveness of the action plans
taken, the availability of a set of efficient and effective performance measures/indicators is
crucial. Above all, the availability of a performance management system is critical in order
to monitor and improve the performance of the green supply chain. Based on these observations, a green performance management framework can be formulated.
PMS development framework

Figure 4 provides a framework for the development of green performance management
systems, consisting of five phases: (1) developing a performance management function,
(2) diagnosis and analysis, (3) developing an action plan, (4) developing a performance
measurement system, and (5) developing a performance management system. These
are explained in the following sections.
Phase 1: GSCM performance function

Proper management of the performance of the green supply chain requires commitment and focus from top management. A dedicated organizational structure must be
set up to facilitate the performance improvement effort. Depending on the supply
chain's needs, size, and characteristics, this structure can be in two basic forms: (a) a
performance management unit, headed by an environmental performance manager
who reports directly to senior management or (b) a cross-functional team comprising
performance coordinators appointed from the concerned operational units.



Phase 2: diagnosis and analysis

For any green performance-related intervention to be effective, one should have a thorough understanding of the current situation of the supply chain. This is done through
a performance diagnosis to assess the supply chain's position, pinpoint its strengths
and weaknesses, and recommend areas for improvement. A green performance diagnosis covers (a) a qualitative assessment of the supply chain performance in relation to
the green levers and (b) a quantitative assessment of the supply chain performance
based on certain key indicators or measures that are linked to the various selected
green levers.
Phase 3: developing an action plan

After completion of the diagnosis step, the next step is to develop an action plan
or a road map based on the findings obtained. The road map helps to direct specific activities towards the desired green performance goals in a systematic manner.
The performance action plan is expected to address the following questions: What
affects green performance? Who affects green performance? When should the activities be undertaken?
Phase 4: performance measurement system

Performance improvement initiatives must be complemented by a sound measurement
system. The measurement system forms an integral part of the supply chain's performance management system. A sound measurement system consists of performance indicators that are useful for (i) monitoring environmental, economic, and social performance,
(ii) setting performance targets, and (iii) developing appropriate supply chain strategies, or
improving existing strategies.
Phase 5: performance management system

A performance measure informs the supply chain decision maker on how and why the
supply chain is performing at a specific rate, and what it should do in view of its
current performance. The next step is to use these indicators to manage green performance. Overall, performance management covers two main areas: (a) activities to
monitor performance and (b) activities to reinforce performance across the supply
chain. However, it is important to emphasize that the effectiveness of these activities
hinge on the underlying system of performance metrics developed in the previous
phase. As such, the next section deliberates on developing a system of green performance metrics.
Developing green PMS metrics

It has been noted that, when developing a system of green performance indicators, one
should take into account the critical requirements, including [1] (i) strategic focus, the
ability of the system of indicators to account for long-term investment decisions and
their impacts; (ii) measurability, the ease with which measurement and assessment of
green efficiency can be done; (iii) completeness, the ability of the performance system
to account for all the relevant performance indicators for effective assessment of the


analyze the collected data; and (v) cost of analysis, concerned with the cost of the resources needed to implement the PMS chosen.
Based on the characteristics of specific green strategies outlined in the taxonomy,
PMS models can be developed to enhance the strategic focus and its measurability,
while considering a judicious trade-off between completeness, timeliness, and cost of
the performance measurement activities.
Environmental performance indicators (measures) are the core requirements of a
PMS for effective evaluation of the environmental performance of processes, activities, and services of the supply chain. The taxonomy of green strategies assists the
supply chain managers in identifying the most effective performance measures and
in designing the most suitable PMS structure. Performance indicators range from
air emissions to energy recovery and recycling. Possible PMS designs include (i)
models which use physical indicators to describe environmental impact resulting
from the strategy adopted, (ii) models based on economic indices linked with economic efficiency, (iii) models based on life-cycle analysis methods indicating the
economic and physical impact of a given strategy throughout the product life cycle,
and (iv) models based on an integrated perspective that indicates the effect of the
adopted green strategy on shareholders' value, physical indices, and economic indices.
The following section analyses performance metrics for the green strategies identified
in this study [4,5,11]. To assess the impact of industrial processes, three categories of
indicators are utilized:
(1) Physical indicators - to measure, in physical terms, how the supply chain activities
affect the natural environment, or
(2) Economic or financial indicators - to measure the variation of the life-cycle costs
associated with the product in question, or
(3) Social indicators - to measure the green image of a firm based on customer or
stakeholder's evaluation.
In the most ideal case, effective PMSs should basically include both physical and economic indicators in an integrated framework. While physical indicators provide a
timely assessment of the activities of the supply chain, economic or financial indicators
indicate how the adopted supply chain activities affect the individual organization's
profitability [4]. Therefore, an efficient PMS supporting the implementation of a green
strategy should consider the physical environmental indicators, which express the organization's environmental performance. These indicators can be aggregated into the following categories [5]:
 Volume indices: These assess the amount of solid wastes resulting from a firm's

production operations, such as percentage of scrap, and percentage of recyclable
products;
 Process efficiency indices: These assess the environmental efficiency of a company's
operations regarding waste water, air emissions and energy consumption.
 Design efficiency indices: These measure the ‘green’ design features defining the
‘green’ products, such as assembly time, number of materials or parts in a product,



In order to monitor the firm's contribution to economic or financial value creation in
the supply chain, a set of carefully selected economic features need to be considered.
These features can be classified into the following categories:
 Operational efficiency: costs of green manufacturing operations, materials, (non)

manufacturing overheads, direct labor, and environmental compliance audits;
 Distribution costs: costs due to transportation, waste disposal and product
take-back;
 Price of the product as well as demand for the product.
Suggested indicators and their descriptions are provided in the next sections.
Indicators for compliance-based strategies

The compliance-based strategy normally arises from the introduction of environmental
regulations, governmental regulations, and extreme customer pressure [57]. The strategy seeks to identify the key areas of concern in line with the organization's capabilities,
leading to the adoption of operations that ensure that the organization meets the required environmental performance. In this connection, the adopted PMS should offer
the following:
 Timely measurement of physical indices to highlight the firm's performance;
 Accurate monitoring of physical indices in order to monitor the trend of the

performance
Air emissions, waste water, solid wastes and energy consumption indicators should
be included in the PMS in accordance with regulations. Table 2 shows the suggested indicators and their descriptions. For environmental performance assessment, the most
effective way is to benchmark the current performance with the regulation standards.
When selecting among different potential solutions or programs, an aggregate indicator, derived from the above indicators, can be used to evaluate the solutions. Thus, four
indicators derived from these indicators can be used to describe the trends in environmental
performance. Specialized indices can be aggregated into these four basic categories.
The identified indicators can be used to evaluate a decrease of various costs: (a) costs
associated with material usage, energy usage, raw material usage and (b) costs associated with fees paid for waste discharge, waste treatment, including transportation and
distribution. These are concerned with process efficiency indices.
The compliance-based PMS is most suitable to organizations that choose to follow
a passive approach to environmental performance with the objective of introducing
green concepts in order to meet customer pressure, or to comply with some limiting
Table 2 Compliance-based performance indicators
No.

Indicator

Description

1

Air emissions

Percentage of gas emissions into the air, e.g., chlorinated pollutants

2

Waste water

Percentage of pollutants in water, e.g., total nitrogen

3

Solid waste

Percentage of materials sent for disposal

4



Page 16 of 20

environmental regulations. One notable negative impact of this perspective is that it
offers limited competitive advantage in the presence of aggressive innovations in environmental performance. Due to its reactive nature, the passive approach often lags
behind the target performance required, resulting in loss of market share. In this regard, timeliness of the PMS is crucial, especially in the presence of fast-changing regulations and customer pressures.
Indicators for lean-based strategies

Lean-based strategies go beyond regulatory compliance through the requirement for
the suppliers to meet operation-based targets. This strategy maximizes on economic
performance while simultaneously providing secondary environmental performance
benefits through waste and resource use reductions. The main objective of this strategy
is to gain dual environmental and economic performance benefits. Therefore, when developing performance indicators for lean-based strategies, the following categories of
measures should be included, if the strategies are to succeed [53,54]:
 Physical indicators and
 Economic indicators

The physical indicators correspond to the compliance-based indicators listed in
Table 2 in the previous section. In addition to this, lean-based economic performance
indicators suggested in this study are summarized in Table 3.
Indicators for innovation-based strategies

The innovation-based strategies often lead to the introduction of new and complex green
product and process technologies. These complex initiatives need complete and timely assessment techniques, usually with less attention on cost disadvantages, if any. Innovationcentered indicators seek to measure such factors as life cycle of product components, and
number of assemblies or number of parts in a product. In this view, the set of performance indicators suitable for this strategy should include the following categories:
 Physical indicators,
 Economic indicators, and
 Innovation-specific indices

Further to the indicators defined in Tables 2 and 3, the PMS should also include indicators concerned with product life, product green efficiency, and green image. Indicators
Table 3 Lean-based economic indicators
No.

Indicator

Description

1

Material costs

Decrease of materials purchasing costs

2

Energy

Decrease of energy consumption costs

3

Inventory costs

Decrease of inventory (storage) costs

4

Waste treatment

Decrease of fees paid for waste treatment

5

Waste discharge

Decrease of fees paid for waste discharge

6



defining product life show how long a product, or its components, can be used. This
evaluation is crucial for long-term forecasting of energy and material usage. Table 4 presents a summary of innovation-based indicators.
Indicators for closed-loop strategies

Performance indicators for the closed-loop supply chain range from air emissions to
energy recovery and recycling indices. Possible designs include (i) physical indicators to
describe environmental impact resulting from the green manufacturing activities, (ii)
economic indices linked with economic efficiency, (iii) life cycle analysis methods indicating the economic and physical impact of the supply chain throughout the product
life cycle.
In a collaborative supply chain environment characterized by integrated relationships,
innovative initiatives such as product take-back and take-back of recyclable end-of-life
materials can easily be supported through involvement of suppliers [62]. In this vein,
life cycle assessment is an appropriate model that should be implemented. This enables
the organization to measure the environmental impacts of the product over its entire
lifecycle, right from collection of raw materials and design to recovery and/or disposal.
The life cycle analysis model can be used to assess the impact of the industrial processes
using: physical, economic, and social indicators. Hence, in addition to the compliancebased indicators (Table 2), the lean-based indicators (Table 3), and the innovation-based
indicators (Table 4), the closed-loop strategy should include the social or ecological performance indicators as well.
Table 5 provides a list of suggested indicators for measuring social performance of a
supply chain. These indices include green image, which is a measure of the customers'
perspective due to the firm's green practices such as product take-back, recycling, and
product recovery. Such activities have a positive impact on the firm's green image from
the perspective of the society.

Conclusions and further research
In every supply chain context, with specific green strategies, it is essential to select or
develop appropriate PMS, if the system is to be effective. This research proposed a
structured approach to guide supply chain managers who intend to develop effective
PMS for specific GSCM strategies.
Managerial implications

The motivation for the adoption of GSCM practices varies across different organizations. Most organizations adopt GSCM practices due to external pressures, and in most
cases, the level of adoption is at the baseline level, that is, they only meet the minimum
requirements [63]. This problem is mostly brought about by the difficulty in justifying
Table 4 Innovation-based performance indicators
No. Indicator

Description

1

Product Life

Life cycle of different product components or sub-assemblies

2

Product green
efficiency

Increase of green design features in a product; number of parts, number of
materials, etc

3

Green image





Table 5 Indicators for social performance
No.

Indicator

Description

1

Percent recycling

Increase in recycled material compared to material disposal

2

Product green efficiency

Increase of green design features in a product; number of parts, etc

3

Green image

Increase in customer goodwill due to greening activities

the economic benefits for the adoption of GSCM practices [29]. Due to a lack of robust
performance measurement systems, it is hard to quantify the tangible benefits derived
from the adoption of different GSCM practices. This study provides a systematic way
of developing performance indicators to allow the consistent quantification of the benefits of adoption of different GSCM practices, across the four green strategies. The taxonomic approach and the measurement techniques presented in this study provide
operational guidelines for devising a set of performance indicators that are suitable for
the selected green strategy. In this regard, the approach is applicable across various
supply chain domains. In addition, the framework can be used to evaluate the possible
available green options when changing from one green strategy to the other. For instance, when changing from compliance-centered to innovation-centered strategy, new
indicators that pertain to the contribution of the enterprise's innovative product and
process technologies should be designed.
Since the adoption of higher level green strategies requires that an organization satisfactorily meets the requirements of lower level strategies, the GSCM framework can be
used as a basis of a maturity model for GSCM practices. Organizations can thus use
the model to assess their level of adoption of GSCM practices. For example, are they at
the stage of compliance-centered or lean-based?
The GSCM framework, through the four strategies, also provides a basis for benchmarking performance against other firms, and enhances inter-organizational relationship
[62,63]. Additionally, the framework can be used as a basis for supplier selection - a firm
can decide to work with organizations at a specific level of GSCM strategy adoption, e.g.
lean-based strategy.
Further research

Further research directions include the validation of the application of green performance indicators for each PMS identified in this research. This will help to establish the
validity of the indicators or the metrics for green supply chain performance measurement across different categories of green strategies. Furthermore, new comprehensive
or hybrid indicators may be designed for integrated assessment of both environmental
and economic performance.
C