
1 Introduction
In order to be prepared for future environmental regulations and to improve market competitiveness, companies
are realizing that they have to reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions from a supply chain perspective. Supply
chain GHG emissions account for around 75 % of the
whole GHG emissions from an industry sector, while
companies’ direct GHG emissions average only 14 % of
their supply chain GHG emissions prior to use and disposal
across all industries [1]. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) [2] released one report certifying that managing supply chain GHG emissions can
effectively avoid exposure to lack of preparedness for
complying with carbon regulations. In fact, numerous ﬁrms
from the electronic industry (i.e., HP and DELL) and retail
industry (i.e., Walmart) have already devoted themselves to
voluntary supply chain GHG emissions reduction programs. Although there is so far no policy targeted on
supply chain GHG emissions reduction, researchers have
recognized that companies in pursuit of green supply chain
strategies could leverage the opportunities offered by
market-based instruments such as emission trading. Gupta
and Palsule-Desai [3] mention that considering the social
cost of carbon emissions in greening supply chain is one of
future research opportunities. Long and Young [4] study
intervention options to enhance the management of supply
chain GHG emissions in the UK. They clarify supply chain
tax, emission trading, and credit schemes as economic
instruments among others to control supply chain
emissions.
The general principle of emission trading is giving a
limit, also called ‘cap’ on the overall amount of GHG
emissions [5]. Initial permits under this cap are allocated to
ﬁrms. One permit gives a right to emit one unit of GHG


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:10

emissions. At the end of a certain period, emission producers have to surrender permits in equivalent to their
accurate emissions. Entities subject to emission trading are
allowed to exchange permits via carbon markets with a
certain price as needed. The price of permits is theoretically decided by the demand and supply in the market but
also aligned to government regulation.
Employing emission trading in the context of supply
chain limits the overall supply chain GHG emissions and
provides ﬂexible compliances for companies to meet their
targets. Hence, it is considered as one of the most costeffective instruments to control supply chain GHG emissions. However, by limiting the GHG emissions from different companies under one common amount, it put supply
chain companies in front of new risks emerging from
sources that are often related to close cooperation. For
example, supply chains intend to reduce GHG emissions
from material extraction, transportation, inventory, and
production, etc., through optimizing supply chain operations and network. Adopting these measures would, in turn,
result in a change in both supply chain GHG emissions and
supply chain risks (see Fig. 1). In particular, those measures that need inter-organizational cooperation can create
the most emissions saving on one hand, and increase supply chain vulnerability on the other hand. For instance,
close cooperation with suppliers and customers can reduce
inventory emissions to a great extent while increasing the
probability of occurrence of supply and demand disruption
[6]. Decreasing these risks needs to build the safety stock
and, therefore, would increase emissions from inventory.
Emission management and risk management are interacted
in the context of the supply chain.
In addition, since emission trading is one market-based
policy instrument, subjecting supply chain GHG emissions
to the emission trading would also put companies at risk of
economic loss/earn, emission market variability, and policy
instability. With the increasing trend in the carbon emissions management, risk management has to be extended to
Fig. 1 Relations between
supply chain emissions and risk
management

cover issues involved in emissions. To further ensure the
implementation of emission trading in the context of supply chain, the following work has to be conducted:
1.

2.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2,
it proposes one concept and one framework for supply
chain emission trading and discusses how such a
scheme might be implemented practically. In Sect. 3, it
identiﬁes risks confronted by companies and supply chains
in this system, classiﬁes risks, and provides mitigation
measures. Section 4 gives a conclusion concerning contributions and deﬁciencies of this work.

2 Including supply chain GHG emissions
into emission trading
2.1 A framework for supply chain emission trading
Literature shows that emission trading might be employed
as one cost-effective instrument for supply chain emissions
reduction. Benjaafar et al. (2012) employs a lot sizing
model to analyze two modes of emission trading coverage
on supply chain. They ﬁnd that imposing supply chainwide emission caps is more cost-effective than individual
cap installation on each ﬁrm and it also increases the value
of collaboration [7]. Jin et al. [8] propose the mixed-integer
linear programming to investigate the impact of three
carbon policies on supply chain design. The result shows
that it costs the retailer less under cap-and-trade to significantly reduce the emission (e.g., by 50 %) compared to the

Supply chain GHG emissions reduction under emission trading
c

influence

influence

Design
operation

c
Supply chain

Supply chain emissions
c

123

To construct a framework for supply chain GHG
emissions reduction under emission trading and clarify
the practical implementation, and
To identify the risks confronted by companies and
supply chains subject to this system and to classify
them into existing supply chain risk groups.

determination

determination

Supply chain risks

free, or for certain auction cost. Supply chains have to get
permits equivalent to their accurate GHGs. At the end of a
regulated period, supply chains have to buy emission permits from markets as any other organizations if their
accurate emissions exceed the amount of allocated permits.
Vice versa, supply chains could bank their extra emission
permits for the use of next periods or sell for an earning.
In addition, this paper also conceptualizes one framework for supply chain emission trading (see Fig. 3). This
framework enables companies to understand the steps for
managing their supply chain emissions and implementing
the detailed processes according to given instructions.
Supply chain GHG emissions as a whole are subjected to a
cap due to government regulations. Given an emissions
reduction target, companies have to ﬁrstly understand the
carbon footprint of their supply chains. In order to draw the
emission heap map, emission sources should be identiﬁed
and measured from operational processes within and beyond
individual companies, facilities, factories and other installations along the supply chain. For supply chains under
emission trading, they can adopt three measures to meet the
emission reduction targets (see Fig. 4). They are internal
measures (i.e., adopting energy-efﬁcient operations to
reduce emissions within the board of individual company),
inter-organizational measures (i.e., cooperating with suppliers and customers to reduce emissions from inventory,
product manufacturing, and transportation), and external
measures (i.e., trading permits from the emission market).
2.2 Discussion for the practical application
Literature analyzes this concept only from the quantitative
aspect, for example, by justifying the cost-effectiveness of
this concept on supply chain performance. However, there
is a lack of research in the application of this concept. This
paper discusses some practical issues involved and provides some solutions as followed.

Supply chain

other two policies. Fareeduddin et al. (2015) present one
optimization model based on carbon regulatory policies for
a closed-loop supply chain design. Optimal results show
that cap-and-trade is the most cost-effective one among
others [9]. Zakeri et al. [10] present an analytical supply
chain planning model to examine the supply chain performance under two policy schemes. They ﬁnd that emissions reduction in a carbon trading scheme follows a
relatively linear trend with a nonlinear cost increase [10].
Carbon trading scheme results in better supply chain performance in terms of emissions generation, cost, and service level than carbon pricing. Chaabane et al. [11] provide
a multi-objective mixed-integer linear programming model
to address supply chain design problems and justiﬁes that
emission trading market may be used to reduce the carbon
abatement cost.
The literature is common in presenting mathematical
models to integrate carbon prices explicitly in green supply
chain design and to justify the cost-effectiveness of
applying the emission trading policy into the context of
supply chain [12–17]. This quantitative analysis allows
evaluating impacts of different decision alternatives in
terms of logistics cost and carbon footprint. It also allows
offsetting the impact of GHG reduction through both
supply chain redesign and emission trading. However, none
of them proposes any concept or application-oriented
framework addressing the implementation of emission
trading in the supply chain context. Based on a review of
previous literature, this paper generates one concept—
supply chain emission trading (Fig. 2).
Supply chain emission trading—this concept is extending emission trading to cover ﬁrms in the range of supply
chains. It means, entities covered by emission trading
scheme (ETS) could be not only single ﬁrms and installation, but also supply chains. Supply chain emissions as a
whole are limited to a certain amount (so-called cap).
Permits under this limit are allocated to supply chains for

10

Emission trading market
Permit flow
Product flow

Fig. 2 Illustration for supply chain emission trading


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:10

Fig. 3 Framework for supply
chain emission trading

Fig. 4 Supply chain emission abatement measures under emission trading. Source: Chaabane et al. [11]

1.

How is responsibility assigned within the supply
chain?

This concept appoints that supply chain works as a single
company to perform emission abatement measures and to
trade emission permits in current trading markets. Hence,
one actor is responsible for the supply chain GHG emissions. This actor is so-called the focal organization. A focal
company is needed to coordinate actions among supply
chain members, for example, calculating emissions amount
from all supply chain partners, arranging emission abatement alternatives (e.g., technological investment, operational adjustment), making decisions for emission permits
buy/sell, and negotiating with policy-makers.

123

2.

Who is responsible for the whole supply chain GHG
emissions?
If there are companies, which are already subjected to emission trading, these companies could be regarded as the focal
organizations responsible for its Scope 3 emissions. Otherwise, a focal company needs to be assigned. To realize the
implementation of emission trading policy on supply chain
GHG emissions, this paper proposes some practical options to
assign the focal organization among supply chain partners.
•
•

The largest company or the one with the most power
among the supply chain.
Actor downstream in the supply chain where the goods

Actor upstream in the supply chain where the goods are
produced.

The largest company in the supply chain would probably
pursue green strategies and, therefore, have incentives to
manage supply chain GHG emissions. The one with the most
power affects the actions of other supply chain partners and
the supply chain performance to the most. Hence, they might
be targeted mandatorily as focal companies in the emission
trading policy to manage their supply chain GHG emissions.
Actors downstream in the supply chain are dealing with end
products and are facing to customers. They could have an
overview of supply chain GHG emissions and guide customers to choose green products. Assigning these actors as
focal organizations might beneﬁt in managing GHG emissions from the overall supply chain perspective and in
affecting the market preference as well. Actors upstream in the
supply chain are always the largest emitters. It might be possible to save a larger amount of emissions by spending less.
Since emission trading scheme (ETS) is so far mainly targeted
on these actors, it would be one possible way to internalize
their Scope 3 emissions into the cap. By doing this, actors
upstream are responsible for the supply chain GHG emissions.
3.

How to set one supply chain emissions reduction
target?

Literature assumes that it is either voluntary or mandatory for
a supply chain to join emission trading and they analyze
mainly the impact of emission trading policy to supply chain
GHG emissions and cost through quantitative optimization
models. Instead, this paper focuses on the conceptual work
and issues involved in the practical application. Emission
trading scheme is so far enforced to installations over certain
emissions level in some industries in the European Union
(EU), and it is getting implemented in more and more countries and sectors all over the world. It is not difﬁcult to imagine
that emission trading would be in the future employed as one
mandatory regulation for supply chain GHG emissions management. Therefore, this paper hypothesizes an enforcement
of emission trading on a supply chain, which means supply
chain has a mandatory cap, and it is allowed to trade emission
permits in the existing markets as same as other organizations.
Besides, this paper proposes a conceptual work by referring to
a general supply chain instead of any speciﬁc one.

3 Risk analysis for supply chains under emission
trading
3.1 Risk identiﬁcation
Risk is generally understood as a negative impact on the
objectives of a company that is associated with

Page 5 of 10

10

disadvantages, damages, and losses. Risks within the supply chain are mainly triggered by disruptions of the
material, information or capital ﬂow between the partners
[18]. Kersten et al. (2006) deﬁne supply chain risk as follows. ‘‘Supply chain risk is the damage—assessed by its
probability of occurrence—that is caused by an event
within a company, within its supply chain or its environment affecting the business processes of at least one
company in the supply chain negatively’’ [19]. The task of
supply chain risk management is ‘‘a collaborative and
structured approach to risk management, embedded in the
planning and control processes of the supply chain, to
handle risks that might adversely affect the achievement of
supply chain goals’’ [20].
Literature addressing supply chain emission trading in
operational research points out that supply chain collaboration is one of the biggest risks to realize the implementation [7]. Employing emission trading in the whole supply
chain would result in cost-effectiveness as well as cost shift
among supply chain partners. How to distribute the spared
cost to supply chain partners is the key to get supply chain
partners collaborated. Besides, emission trading is a politically established market-based instrument to reduce
GHGs. Applying emission trading on the range of supply
chain is subject to potential risks not only from market
variation, but also from political interventions as well [21].
Considering potential damages, losses, and disadvantages of emission trading’s exploration on supply chain
ﬁrms, this paper suggests a risk portfolio and expands risks
identiﬁed already in the literature (see in Fig. 5).
1.

Agreement risks (responsibility allocation dispute)

By including supply chains into emission trading, supply
chain partners work together as a single ﬁrm. Different
supply chain partners have different emission abatement
marginal costs. Their goal is to reduce supply chain
emissions as a whole at the minimal cost. To meet this
goal, emission reduction cost might be transferred from one
company to another where companies who are more costeffective in emissions reduction would reduce more. Since
there is an extra beneﬁt from supply chain integration, it
might be allocated to each supply chain ﬁrm as compensation. In this situation, there are risks when compensation
methods are unfair or not satisﬁed for all inclusive supply
chain ﬁrms [7]. Supply chain partners might terminate
contracts with others due to increasing emissions cost or
low interest in emissions reduction. Therefore, supply
chains under emission trading are more vulnerable to
supply chain instability than normal supply chains.
2. Green investment risks (green investment uncertainty)
One of the main alternatives for supply chain ﬁrms under
the emission trading is to adopt green investment (also


Logist. Res. (2016) 9:10

Fig. 5 Risk sources and identiﬁcation for supply chains under emission trading

called abatement measures). Green investment refers to
adopting actions and resources for saving energy and ecofriendly transportation, which includes technological efﬁciency improvement and operational efﬁciency improvement. For example, companies could optimize their supply
chains in order to save emissions from inventory, production, and transportation. However, such behavior is going
to intensify the supply chain risks brought by supply chain
inter-dependence. Furthermore, compared to permits’ purchasing, green investment is a proactive measure as it has a
long-term and sustainable effect on supply chain ﬁrms’
performance, moving toward the goal of reducing GHG
emissions [22]. Some abatement measures provide extremely high cost, while some provide revenue rather than
cost. Firms have to decide which abatement measures
should be adopted to reduce internal emissions according
to their economic and operational performance, but the
long-term cost and beneﬁt of the implementation is
unpredictable. In addition to usual risks, companies are
also confronted with risks resulted by inappropriate
investment in green technologies and other green practices.
3. Volume risks (emissions accounting failure)
Supply chain companies need to submit equivalent permits
at the end of each year to cover all of their accurate
emissions. However, it is not possible to pre-estimate
supply chain emissions accurately before going through
this year. Companies buy and sell permits from time to

123

time according to the price change in the market. Inaccurate forecast of supply chain emissions could result in
overstock or shortage of permits [21]. Each permit stands
for cost and revenue for companies, and overstock or
shortage of permits would possibly bring economic losses
for companies.
4. Market risks (trading market instability)
The price of permits is theoretically decided by demand
and supply in the market. Such a market competition system enables the high market volatility on one hand but it
results in uncertainty in permits’ price on the other hand.
The EU ETS, so far the largest ETS around the world, has
gone through starting phases from 2005 to 2007 as the ﬁrst,
and from 2008 to 2012 as the second. In the ﬁrst phase, the
price of permits in the EU market is almost zero due to the
oversupply of permits allocation to ﬁrms [23]. And the low
price in the second phase is largely attributed to declining
economic activity levels after the big economic crisis in
2007 [24]. As a result, the uncertainty of permits’ price
brings the risk of an unpredictable cost incurred by emission trading.
5. Policy risks (trading policy uncertainty)
Emission trading is a politically established market-based
instrument to reduce emissions of GHGs and others. And
infant stage. Policies change from time to time according to
the ﬁrst-hand experiences attained in practice. The EU ETS
sets free allocation for all emission permits in the ﬁrst
phase and the proportion of free allocation is getting
smaller in the later phases. Different allocation methods
and the combination of them are put into practice. For
example, only electricity generators can get some proportion of free allocation in the third phase while other
industrial manufacturers have to auction for permits that
they need [5]. Such policies’ change put companies at the
risk of the unstable cost burden.
3.2 Risk categorization
Supply chain risks can be categorized in many different
ways and from different perspectives. One possible way is
the classiﬁcation of supply chain risks into two types:
operational risk and disruption risk [25–27]. Operational
risk is deﬁned as ‘‘the risk of loss resulting from inadequate
or failed internal processes, people, and systems or from
external events’’ [25]. Examples of operational risks are
quality, delivery or service problems [27]. Disruption risk
is referred to natural or manmade disasters such as terrorist
attacks, sociopolitical instability, strikes, earthquakes,
hurricanes and ﬂoods [26, 27].
Another way is to identify sources of risks within the three
areas: company, supply chain, and environment (see Fig. 6).
Internal risks within a company include process risks (i.e.,
disruption of the production processes) and control risks (i.e.,
management failure or inﬂexible decision rules). Supply and
demand risks are disruptions of the material, information or
capital ﬂow between suppliers and customers [6]. All potential
damage caused by sociopolitical, macroeconomic or technical
changes are represented by environmental risks [18].
Based on the concept of supply chain risks, this paper
classiﬁed these risks into each group of supply chain risks
according to the distribution of risk sources (see Fig. 7).
Supply chains under emission trading are exposed to
additional risks. Being subject to the cap-and-trade, supply
chains are confronted with risks from both policy and

Page 7 of 10

10

market perspective. By committing to reduce emissions
under the cap, supply chain ﬁrms encounter new risks of
green investment uncertainty and emissions accounting
failure. Accounting failure would result also in surrendering not enough permits at the end of a certain period. In
addition, supply chain ﬁrms must be exposed to the risk of
responsibility allocation dispute when assigning the emissions reduction responsibility among supply chain partners.
This risk is also raised by distributing the spared cost or
extra beneﬁt to supply chain partners.
3.3 Strategies for risk mitigation
The implementation of emission trading on supply chain
would not only intensify some risks for supply chain
companies but also increase some additionally. All these
risks could be regarded as disadvantages in including
supply chains into emission trading from business and
political point of view. They take essential roles in promoting supply chain ﬁrms reducing emissions and collaborating with each other. These risks are also what
government should focus on when they are considering
employing emission trading on supply chains. Although
this paper is limited in conducting the risk assessment,
authors contribute still in providing some risk mitigation
measures for both policy-makers and business companies.
(a)

(b)

To engage supply chain into emission trading based
on leading ﬁrms in each supply chain. Leading ﬁrms
are powerful to encourage supply chain partners to
collaborate in reducing emissions together. And
leading ﬁrms could also set emission reduction
targets for other partners due to its large power and
business attractiveness. Therefore, leading ﬁrms
could be targeted as main subjects in the ﬁrst step
of including supply chains.
To learn experiences from existing ETS to set the
supply chain emission limit so called cap. The cap
could either be drafted by ﬁrms and permitted by
governments or directly issued by governments.
Permits could be allocated to supply chain partners
according to the method ‘benchmark’ which beneﬁts
green ﬁrms and punishes others.

Fig. 6 Sources of risk within a
supply chain. Source: Kersten
et al. [19]

Risks

Supply Chain Risks

Supply Chain

10

Logist. Res. (2016) 9:10

Supplier

Supply risks

Company

Internal risks

Customer

Demand risks

Supply Chain Environment

Environment risks
Social-political risks

Capital disruption

Cultural risks
s
Natural disaster

Trading policy uncertainty
Trading market instability

Material disruption

Production disruption

Material disruption

Information disruption

Control failure
s

Information disruption
s

Capital disruption

Green investment
uncertainty

Green investment
uncertainty

Green investment
uncertainty

Responsibility
allocation dispute

Emissions accounting
failure

Responsibility
allocation dispute

Fig. 7 Risk categorization for supply chains under emission trading

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

To jointly regulate permits price by market system
and governmental intervention at the beginning. Too
high or too low price would prohibit the goal of
supply chain emission reduction. Proper intervention
from the government is necessary to keep the price
ﬂuctuate in a reasonable range.
To clarify beneﬁts and costs of green technologies
through ofﬁcial third parties. Professional parties
have experiences and experts to verify emission
savings and costs of main green technologies, and
these parties could be connected to the department of
permits veriﬁcation in existing ETS.
To import offset/credit concepts within the range of
supply chain. It means, the leading company in the
supply chain could get credits by investing into
emissions reduction projects within the board of
other supply chain ﬁrms. These credits could be used
as additional permits in the existing emission trading
market. Credit projects could also be invested by
other supply chain ﬁrms and sold to the leading
companies at a certain price.
To add agreements in business contracts among
supply chain partners concerning cost/beneﬁts allocation. There are many kinds of contracts that could
compensate the loss of ﬁrms induced by emission
trading, such as product price discount, operational
contract extension, and so on. It would also offer
mind share to refer to some quantitative models in
operational research.

123

4 Conclusion
It is well recognized that in order to combat climate
change, GHG emissions need to be managed from the
supply chain perspective. This paper moves one more step
forward on the base of literature by introducing one concept—supply chain emission trading and one framework in
addressing emission trading in the context of supply chains.
To implement the supply chain emission trading, this paper
proposed to assign the responsibility of supply chain GHG
emissions to the focal company in the supply chain by
including the scope 3 emissions of the focal company into
ETS. Moreover, this paper discerns itself from others by
identifying risks for supply chains under emission trading
program. From a corporate perspective, these risks are
from policy instability, market variation, supply chain
agreement dispute, green investment uncertainty, and
supply chain GHG emission accounting failure. Moreover,
based on the concept of supply chain risks, this paper
attributes green investment risks to internal and external
risks, policy and market risks to supply chain environmental risks, accounting risks to internal risks, and agreement risks to external risks.
The concept proposed in this paper lays the foundation
for future research to address further qualitative issues
involved in employing emission trading in the context of
supply chain, such as analyzing the challenges and
opportunities within the implementation processes.
are considering leveraging the opportunities offered by
emission trading to manage their supply chain GHG
emissions. Furthermore, having an overview of companies’
risks provides mind share for policy-makers before they
start implementing emission trading in the context of
supply chain. For example, they could make efforts to
decrease the accounting failure risk by importing one
uniﬁed supply chain GHG emission measurement tool or
standard. Last but not least, this paper contributes in connecting supply chain risk management and supply chain
emissions management through classifying identiﬁed risks
into each group of supply chain risks. By doing so, it makes
the resources and experiences in the area of supply chain
risk management accessible to facilitate the implementation of supply chain emission trading, and paves the way
for future research in risks assessment and evaluation.
However, this paper is just a ﬁrst step towards realizing
the employment of emission trading in the context of
supply chain and it has limitations. The supply chain
emission trading proposed in this paper works on the base
that there exists a focal company in the supply chain.
Nevertheless, it doesn’t apply to supply chains that are
composed by many small and equally powerful companies.
Future research might consider conducting an analysis of
challenges and opportunities involved in the implementation
processes. For instance, the Monitor, Review, and Verify
(MRV) system of ETS has to be extended to adapt for the
supply chain scale in supply chain emission trading. In
addition, it is worthy to explore other mechanisms to realize
supply chain emission trading concerning different supply
chain organizational structures. As suggested in this paper,
supply chain credit scheme that incorporates the concept of
credit/offset into the supply chain emission trading would
provide ﬂexibility. Furthermore, it is interesting to assess and
evaluate those identiﬁed risks and investigate how they
interact with the existing supply chain risk portfolio.
