
Introduction
Global governance is a relative new concept. It is often defined in terms of what is not: it is not
a world government. In one of the first studies on global governance, published in 1992, James
Rosenau defines the concept as a world order where there is no central authority and capacity to
implement global decisions (Rosenau, 1992, p.7). His idea of global governance is that of an existing
order for managing interdependence in the absence of a state. The definition is very broad and there
is no reference to who should take or implement the decisions.
More recently, Weiss and Thakur (2010) provide a more comprehensive definition of global
governance. According to the two authors, global governance includes all laws, rules, policies and
institutions that constitute and mediate relations between citizens, businesses, markets and states in
the international arena (Weiss and Thakur, 2010, p.6).
Despite the fact that currently there is no global government as the UN General Assembly is
not a world parliament and Ban Ki-moon is not the president of the world, we can affirm there is
some level of government. Moreover, Weiss and Thakur argue that the desire to improve the
functioning of global governance has little to do with the desire to create a world government.

According to Cynthia Weber (1995), sovereignty means the absolute authority that a state holds
over a territory and its people, as well as independence and internationally recognition by other
sovereign states as a sovereign state (Weber, 1995, p.1).
Modern state sovereignty was at first dependent of relations between states, based on the idea
that each state (in principle and not always in practice) acknowledges the autonomy of others within
their own borders. Held and McGrew (2003) argue that no state, no matter how strong it is, held as
much sovereign control in practice, as enshrined in legal principle.
1. Global governance vs. national sovereignty – current challenges
1.1. Global governance

Both governance and the government are composed of a system of rules and mechanisms by
which authority is exercised in order to allow systems to maintain consistency and to meet the desired
objectives. Governance systems are social functions or processes that can be made or applied in a
variety of ways in different times and places for a variety of organizations.
The instruments of global governance take the form of treaties, customary international law,
international organizations, formal and informal rules embedded etc. Formal international institutions
are both globally and regionally. Examples of global institutions are the United Nations (UN), the
World Trade Organization (WTO), the World Health Organization, the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), etc. Among formal regional organizations can be included Shanghai
Cooperation Organization that includes Russia, China and the former Soviet republics of Central
Asia: Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, whose objective is to maximize the
economic, diplomatic and military between Member States. In essence, these countries consider that
global security should be based on the coexistence of several centres for peace, linked to centres of
civilization.
Also, issues related to global governance are addressed at BRICS Summits as well. At the third
BRICS Summit, which took place on 13 and 14 April 2011, with the acceptance of South Africa in
the group, they addressed issues such as the need to reform the UN, the inclusion of Russia in the
WTO and cooperation in the Council Security in the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Libya.
In addition to these international institutions, there are informal institutions, like the Bildenberg
Club, the Club of Rome, the Trilateral Commission, G8, G20, G5. The advantage of these informal

first glance the lack of formality of these structures, whose decisions are not mandatory but
recommended, can be considered a weakness, reality has shown that often their influence exceeds
that of many formal global institutions.
On the other hand, Jagdish Bhagwati (2004) emphasizes the importance of civil society on the
global governance process. Civil society, reflecting national mobilization, values, culture and political
sensitivities, provides opportunities for better management of globalization in democratic societies.
In this regard, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have a major role. For example,
governments, especially in poor countries, adopt legislation such as the 'polluter pays' principle, but
not the means to monitor compliance. In this context, NGOs are pursuing compliance.
Also, Bhagwati (2004) draws the attention to multinational corporations, which although nongovernmental organizations, they play an essential role in providing appropriate governance through
what is called "corporate social responsibility".
In other words, we can say that there are multiple levels of governance, from the local level,
continuing with national and regional level, global problems being managed globally. For each level
of government, there are special institutions, not independent but overlapping powers and
responsibilities of each. However, coordinating the efforts of various stakeholders, from local to
global, governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental proves to be a real challenge to
global governance.
Global governance is shaped by a growing tension between the need to internationalize as many
rules and the willingness of states to assert and preserve national control. The balance between
internationalization and national sovereignty is constantly changing as powerful forces are pushing
in both directions simultaneously and we cannot know whether reconciliation between the two is
possible.
The global arena in the last decades has created a favourable context of global governance.
First, states are not the only actors; various other actors (civil society, international experts) have
become active players. Secondly, there is a rigid concept of territoriality. Most problems are crossborder and transnational in nature. Third, there is a hierarchy of problems. All issues are of equal
importance, interdependent, making it a more complex world than ever before.
The role of global governance can be separated into two. On one hand, it can design a structure.
Designing a structure - be it architecture or complex framework - provides the ability to create a
useful mechanism. On the other hand, global governance can manage a process. In short, we can

1.2. National sovereignty

The growing importance of global governance has brought discussions regarding national
sovereignty to a new level. In the contemporary period, sovereignty is still being tested. Most likely,
the sovereign state is still the main unit of the international system, but the operation and its legitimacy
is underestimated by both external factors and internal factors.
Held and McGrew (2003) believe that sovereignty is disputed because the political authority is
compromised by the regional, global, economical and cultural factors. The legitimacy of the state is
raised because, due to increasing regional and global interdependence, states can no longer provide
basic goods and services to their citizens without international cooperation. However, international
cooperation can be often quite inadequate in the face of global problems - from global warming to
volatile movements in the financial markets - that can fully escape political settlement.
The principle of national sovereignty is challenged by those who argue that during serious
humanitarian crises, the international community (NGOs, international institutions and states) has the
right to intervene to help people who are not protected by their states. In the past, only sovereign
states and not individuals had a role in international law. Accordingly, within national borders, a
political system could do anything with its citizens, even if it meant to be human rights violations or
be neglected basic human needs.
Thus, we can say that we are witnessing a transfer of sovereignty from the national state to
individuals. Given that there are several levels of government (local, regional, national, global),
individuals can target the appropriate form they need. For example, in regards to Human Rights,
individuals that feel they rights have been violated by their states, can address to the European Court
of Human Rights, at least in Europe. The European Court of Human Rights is a supranational
organization which guarantees fundamental human rights and freedoms set out in the European
Convention on Human Rights.
Sovereignty is questioned not only in theory but also in practice. Sovereignty is externally
challenged by the dynamics of globalization: markets, companies and open technologies, which are
permeable boundaries powerful states by external forces. Internally, sovereignty is eroded by internal
conflicts and subnational movements and the strengthening of economic development crisis (shortage
of resources, environmental degradation, and population growth). This undermines the legitimacy
and international underlying national sovereignty. Both external and internal factors have led to an

2. The global crisis and the changing distribution of power in the world

The crisis of 2007, which originated in the United States, led the global economy into recession.
Under these circumstances, the world is facing a change in the distribution of power in the world.
As a direct consequence of the global crisis, the international community has tried to build a
new form of global economic governance centred on the G20. In November 2008, in Washington
DC, met the leaders of the world's top 20 economies and agreed a series of measures and a joint action
plan to cope with the crisis, including solutions to revive their economies (without affecting the world
trade), to regulate global finance, to help the poorest countries affected by the crisis and to reform
international institutions, as Ngaire Woods highlights (2010). From the first meeting of G20, an action
plan has delegated specific tasks to different international institutions (IMF, World Bank and other
multilateral development banks, United Nations Development Programme, the Financial Stability
Board). G20 leaders met again in London in April 2009, meeting that strengthened the capacity of
the organization to comply with a new action plan, announcing nearly 750 billion dollars for the IMF,
for this purpose. All this was again revised in September 2009, at their third meeting in Pittsburgh
(Woods, 2010, p.52).
The current financial problems in the euro area could be a boost to justify this process, at least
in the short term. In the medium and long term, the crisis will give impetus to the search of new forms
of global governance, as it will increase the need to strengthen cooperation on global economic policy.
It is possible that the future international relations to be largely characterized by rivalry and
cooperation between countries beyond the global ruling establishment. Each state, managed by a
political instinct and power, will try to use different forms of governing as a global forum for
discussion to maximize their own national interest. At the same time, countries will seek to advance,
in order to create public international goods.
On the other hand, the world is constantly changing. Over the last decades, emerging markets
and developing countries have experienced unprecedented growth. Global governance has had much
to gain from the peaceful growth of the BRICS countries. Approximately one billion people rose from
poverty without causing major international turbulence. The global financial crisis has not only
boosted the process, but also produced new challenges and difficulties. As the crisis continues, it is
clear that global economic growth has evolved. It is also clear that a proportional change in paradigms
of global governance has not yet occurred. For example, Van Kerckhoven and Hazenberg (2013)

engage in violent confrontations. However, the recent conflict in Ukraine proves that things are not
so. The current level of global governance cannot yet guarantee peace and stability, even in the
developed world. This not only confirms that global governance is only in its infancy, but it gives it
a chance to take the shape and characteristics of specific global phenomena.
At the same time, the power of the United States is questionable. Although in absolute terms
the US remains the superior power, in relative terms, its decline gradually became an undeniable fact.
US still is a great economic, cultural, symbolic and military power, but the changing distribution of
power has impacted global governance and the way the international order is managed. Given the
changes in the international environment in recent years, the international community will rejuvenate
and align efforts to build global governance in various fields.
However, on short and medium term, global governance is able to come up with progress in at
least three directions. The first would be more equal spread of global development. While absolute
poverty has fallen dramatically in the past 20 years, inequality has skyrocketed. From a global
perspective, the least developed countries continuously lose ground to developed economies. Rather
than fall behind the developed countries, least developed economies is likely to fall outside the global
economy. And even within countries, inequality is increasing. While balancing growth and
distributive justice is a difficult exercise, global governance should require countries to undertake
such an exercise.
A further development of global governance would be needed in terms of reducing emissions
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and stopping global warming. Temperatures are still growing
while biodiversity declines at a rate dangerous. The threat of global warming is created by human
activity, and the solutions are still in the hand of people. Governments should intensify their efforts
to internalize energy harmful externalities.
Third, to achieve a more equal spread of global development and a reduction in emissions of
greenhouse gases requires global cooperation as representative. Disregard of the interests of people
living in poor or failed states is not only an internal system failure, but more the guilt of the global
governance architecture in which these people have only a minor word to say. For example, G20 is
watching for the good of a few countries, compared to the number of existing states around the globe.
In this context, Africa is almost entirely excluded from international political discourse. The current
form of global governance is not representative of most of the states. If NGOs or companies would
get politically involved, they would become the designated representative agencies whether they like

To meet these challenges, we must overcome a lot of obstacles. The first and most important of
them is nationalism. National interests still crash often collective solutions. Different national or local
preferences (often exacerbated by a strong lobby), are the less inclined to do something for the
international community, reducing the possibility of reaching a higher overall result.
In addition, it is worrying that civil society and national media often neglect the international
stage. Objective information and international NGOs have enormous potential to increase public
awareness of global arena. Citizens must know what makes their country international. Overcoming
this obstacle is to discover benign forms of nationalism which remain open so supranational decisions
and internally. This implies a precarious balancing act between the desire democratic local decision
making and the need for global governance human rights. Currently, unfortunately a lot of local
leaders refuse to look beyond the national interest and also many international leaders refuse to
recognize the integrity of their communities.
Regarding the future evolution of national sovereignty, Maryann Cusimano Love (2011) sees
three possible scenarios. Under the first scenario, the world is witnessing the end of the nation state.
Decisions on investment, production and exchange rates are taken elsewhere by institutions and
individuals on which states have very little control. National labels are meaningless. States lose their
ability to respond to economic blows. In this context, the regions are becoming increasingly
important.
According to the second scenario the stated are retiring, as their functions are changing. Today,
either these functions are fulfilled by other entities, either they are no longer met. Susan Strange
(1996) discuss some of the functions in the decline of states. First, the state is responsible for the
defence of the national territory, but in developed countries there is minimal danger of foreign
invasion, thus being eroded state authority. Second, the state must provide foreign currency value,
but inflation of a country can be transmitted to others. Third, states used to choose the form of desired
economic development, but open economies allow market pressures from the IMF, the World Bank
and private investors to limit the choices of states.
At the same time, the contemporary state no longer orders resources but negotiates, gaining
strength in foreign direct investment, educated workforce and a skilled market and not a military
superiority and territorial control. Thus, there is a crisis of democratic politics as countries lose some
elements of autonomy in selecting and applying policy to unelected and non-state actors.
The third scenario assumes that nothing fundamental has changed in terms of national
sovereignty because existing states have little incentive to change the system. States shall guarantee

are just few serious challenges to sovereign arrangements. National sovereignty is becoming
increasingly entrenched as far as religious, ethnic and nationalist challenges enhance the state. In spite
of the fact that national sovereignty is not an optimal arrangement, it is too early to declare its
extinction. Furthermore, in response to the economic crisis in 2007, many states have tried to revive
national institutions and public expenditure.
All the above scenarios regarding the future of national sovereignty include well argued
statements, but that only capture distinct aspects of the same reality. We are not witnessing the end
of the national states yet, but it is obvious that their role has changed. In the short and medium term,
we are witnessing what is called global governance, understood as a mechanism for state and nonstate entities to seek solutions to transnational problems, through cooperation in order to manage the
globalization in the context of the exchange of power distribution. On this basis, strengthening global
governance inevitably translates into the development of institutions whose purpose is to find an
appropriate balance between national sovereignty and global responsibility.

Conclusions

In conclusion, the concept of global governance must take a deeper meaning. Global
governance must be seen as the only realistic way of governing in a world increasingly complex and
interdependent. There is still much room for constructive action, and all nations and interested
organizations should participate in this difficult task. The recent global crisis has shown that states
alone cannot cope with both their internal problems and especially the increasing global challenges.
Although states are facing the fear of the erosion of their national sovereignty, they must adapt and
give some of their powers to supranational actors to respond better to global issues and challenges.
It is clear that the concepts of global governance and national sovereignty will mutate, as there
will be another system of interaction between the main national and international actors. Basically
there will be a new world order as "black swans" (extreme events, unexpected and atypical), as
Nassim Nicholas Taleb calls them, will shape the world.

Woods, N. (2010), “Global Governance after the Financial Crisis: A New Multilateralism or the Last
