clearly stands out. Marchand and Walker (2008) point out that many contemporary authors
in the field of sustainability suggest that there is a clear need for reorienting consumption
patterns and, more fundamentally, the dominant economic system based on unlimited
growth in our materially finite world. Sustainability-orientated consumer research
encompasses a variety of concepts of more sustainable consumption using a range of labels
for consumers and their behavior (including green, greener, responsible, sustainable, proenvironmental, pro-social, pro-ecological, environmentally conscious, ecological
conscious, frugal, altruistic, equitable, ecological, ethical, or alternative) (Wells et al., 2008;
Witt, 2012). On the basis of the research into the attitude of Romanian consumers with
respect to the ecological labelling of products, Dinu et al. (2012) concludes that the
ecologic label acts as a passport allowing products to freely circulate on the European
territory, generating a larger number of consumers for environment-friendly products.
In this paper, individuals are the key actors of sustainability. In general, sustainable behaviors
are defined as behaviors of environmental responsibility thoroughly permeating an individual’s
daily activities. They also ground on the consequences of such actions and on an implicationconcern basis. An individual is visibly responsible towards the environment throughout his or
her actions rather than single-minded for the purpose of his or her personal utilitarian
satisfaction, an action that would have the least possible impact on the environment (Wai and
Bojei, 2015). Pappas (et al., 2015) points out that an individual has a critical role when the
success of efforts towards achieving sustainability in diverse contexts is concerned. By first
individually changing ourselves, we change humanly in a meaningful way; prior to our being
able to expect a systemic community or global change, we ought to recognize the sophisticated
systems within ourselves and engage them. The author focuses on embodying “Individual
Sustainability”, referring to it as to Sustainable Personality. Pappas defined a sustainable
personality as follows: “A Sustainable Personality is characterized by attitudes and behaviors
that tend to create harmony, interconnections, and relatively high levels of self-awareness in
values, thoughts, and actions as well as cultivate continued individual growth in physical,
emotional, social, philosophical, and intellectual abilities. A Sustainable Personality also
includes a well-developed and demonstrated value system that acknowledges the importance
and interconnectedness of all global geo-biological and social systems, and our appropriate
place within them” (Pappas, 2012; Pappas et al., 2015, p. 324). The definition clearly highlights
the individual as well as the importance and interconnectedness of the attitudes, the value system
and the behaviors of an individual within all global geo-biological and social systems.
An individual plays different roles and has different activities with respect to those roles.
An individual is a family member, a consumer, an employee at an organization and a
member of the society. How an individual behaves greatly contributes to his or her own
sustainability as well as the sustainability of his or her family, the organization he or she
works at, the environment and the society. On the other hand, the family, the organization
he or she works at, the environment and the society have an impact on the behavior and the
pattern of life and work of an individual.
The change of consumer behaviour is a long-term process and it requires a systematic and
holistic approach. The process of our moving towards sustainability and sustainable
lifestyles will be gradual and simultaneously observed within the context of a holistic shift
to new lifestyles, incorporating the related buying and the customary components
surpassing the boundaries of conventional behavior (Gilg et al., 2005, p. 503). However, as

spending patterns and economic trends, are generally understood to be difficult to alter.
Based on the above, this paper focuses on the process of creating and maintaining the SLOI
on the basis of the SLMOI.
This paper aims to present the interconnectedness between the SLMOI and the SLOI and
their mutual impact on sustainability. After the introductory section, the first part presents
theoretical foundations in the field of sustainable lifestyles and profile of sustainability
oriented consumers. In the second section, the research method is described. Research
results are given in the third section. The fourth section is dedicated to discussion. The key
contributions made by this paper are presented, and the contributions are related to the
emphasizing of the roles of 1) individuals, on the basis of the SLOI, and 2) organizations,
on the basis of the SLMOI in the process of sustainable development. In conclusion, we
highlight the importance of changes of the attitudes and behaviors of all actors – from
governments, organizations and families to individuals – in the long-term process of
sustainable lifestyles creation. The key conclusion refers to the SLMOI leading to the SLOI,
and the SLOI leading to sustainability.
1. Theoretical foundations and development hypotheses
1.1. Sustainable lifestyles
The three main types of consumers’ ethical behavior have been identified in the literature
by Papaoikonomou (2013), namely: 1) buycotting, which means the consumer’s making
choice of and purchasing certain products and services over other ones for the sake of
ethical considerations. This can be exemplified by buying fair trade or sustainable products.
2) Boycotting, which means the consumer’s being allowed to show his social concerns by
not performing certain actions or by avoiding to buy a product. This is either the result of
companies’ commercializing their product but having a record of an unethical social
behavior (company-oriented boycotting) or of such companies’ products being
unsustainable (product-oriented boycotting). And 3) ethical simplifiers, which means
opting for cutting down on the levels of consumption and adopting a simpler lifestyle.
Black and Cherrier (2010) point out anti-consumption as part of living a sustainable
lifestyle. They found that green consumption, whilst practiced, is not an essential part of
sustainable living. Anti-consumption is an integral part of trying to live a more sustainable
life and in particular, the acts of rejecting, reducing and reusing consumption are key
elements to sustainable consumption.
Sustainable lifestyle includes everyday sustainable patterns of activities, interests and
opinions of people. “Sustainable lifestyles are patterns of action and consumption, used by
people to affiliate and differentiate themselves from other people, which: meet basic needs,
provide a better quality of life, minimize the use of natural resources and emissions of
waste and pollutants over the lifecycle, do not jeopardize the needs of future generations”
(Bedford et al., 2004, p. ii).
In the above but also in other definitions of sustainable lifestyles, patterns of action and
consumption that lead to the achievement of the objectives of sustainability are highlighted,
and especially those that lead to the achievement of environmental and social objectives
(table no. 1). “Sustainable consumption is related to the purchase, use and disposal of

activities such as interpersonal relationships, leisure activities, sports and education as well
as, but not limited to, material consumption. Lifestyles are based on past and current
consumption and production patterns and are intricately interwoven with people’s everyday
choices and practices” (Mont 2007 in Backhaus et al., 2011, p. 9).
Table no. 1: Attitudes and behaviour for sustainable lifestyle - life patterns
Some issues
Sustainable mindset: Attitudes and behaviour for sustainable lifestyle - life
of sustainable
patterns
lifestyle
Sustainable water - Use water more efficiently; Reduce use of water
(e.g. car washing, lawn sprinklers, dish washers); Increasing awareness
Water
and behaviour change for water conservation;
Learning about healthy eating habits; Cooking and managing a sustainable &
healthier diet; Increasing proportion of vegetables, fruit, and grains in diet (eating a
Food and
balanced diet); Choosing foods grown in season (in country of origin); Purchase
products
locally grown produce; Reduce levels of highly processed food; Wasting less food;
Growing awareness and better information on healthy diets and lifestyles (e.g.
labeling); Increased availability and demand for local, ecological and seasonal
Health and
food; Initiatives that promote walking, cycling and limit cigarette smoking in
society
buildings; Increasingly successful efforts to integrate health and equity
considerations into policy making and urban planning
Purchase energy efficient appliances and do not leave appliances in standby mode;
Increasing awareness and behaviour change for energy conservation;
Energy
Zero carbon - Make buildings more energy efficient and deliver all energy with
renewable technologies.
Sustainable transportation - Encourage low carbon modes of transport to reduce
emissions, reducing the need to travel; Strategic urban planning to decrease
mobility needs and make sustainable modes of transport safer and accessible;
Increasingly successful efforts to stimulate modal shifts toward walking, cycling or
Transport
public transportation; Growth in car sharing services that show a shift away from
private ownership to collaborative consumption; More efficient transportation
technologies, such as electric vehicles;
Sustainable jobs; Create bioregional economies that support fair employment,
Jobs
inclusive communities and international fair trade.
Purchasing from a local store; Purchasing products that have a reduced
environmental impact; Choosing eco-products & services; Using labelling to
choose most energy & water efficient products; Choosing fairly traded, ecoPurchasing
labelled and independently certified food, clothing, etc.; Borrowing, hiring or
sourcing second-hand or recycled;
Efficient consumption (wasting less), different consumption (shifts to high quality
Consumption goods and services), sufficient consumption (reducing material consumption),
collaborative consumption (sharing, swapping, trading, etc.)
Revive local identities and wisdom; support and participate in the arts
Culture
and heritage
Extending the life of things (to minimise waste); Maintaining & repairing (instead
of replacing); Recycle household waste; Dispose of toxic materials safely;
Waste
Compost organic waste; Zero waste - Reduce waste, reuse where possible, and
ultimately send zero waste to landfill.

Source: Based on Bedford et al., 2004; Gilg et al., 2005; Haq et al., 2008; Backhaus et al.,
2011.
activities as examples of green consumption:
 Purchasing products, such as detergents, that have a reduced environmental impact;
 Avoiding products with aerosols;
 Purchasing recycled paper products (such as toilet tissue and writing paper);
 Buying organic produce;
 Buying locally produced foods;
 Purchasing from a local store;
 Buying fairly traded goods;
 Looking for products using less packaging;
 Using one’s own bag, rather than a plastic carrier provided by a shop.
On the basis of the research into sustainable eating, the way how what people eat may have
an effect on a spectrum of macro-marketing issues including sustainability, the quality of
life, equity and development, food security, gender relations and market systems have been
identified by Beverland (2014). His suggestion was that our concerns regarding sustainable
living should be focused on our addressing our dietary habits in developed countries. This
is so because there are a lot of people in the developing world who passionately try to
imitate the lifestyles of the Western world, which has already initiated a number of
problems related to the consumption of animal-based protein.
Sustainable lifestyles are based not only on consumption and production patterns, but also
on sustainable life patterns generally speaking. Consumption choices of consumers are
powerful decisions that make in their everyday life, but they might not see consequences
and force. Consumption choices of consumers shape markets and production patterns. They
have tremendous impacts on our natural resources and ecosystems as well as on our global
community – contributing to issues such as climate change and human rights. Consumers
through purchasing choices vote in the market, support or reject certain corporate practices.
Through them consumers also send messages to decision-makers in governments,
industries and companies (UNEP, 2010, p. 4). Choices and patterns of nutrition, education,
socialisation, attitude towards purchasing, consumption – life in general etc. affect the
overall sustainability. The bases of sustainable lifestyles are sustainable patterns of
activities, interests and opinions of people which enable economic, social and
environmental sustainability.
Lorek and Spangenberg (2000 cited in Bedford et al., 2004) suggest that the major
consumption clusters relevant to lifestyle are: nutrition, housing, transport, social choices
(education, health provision etc), financial investments, leisure activities, holiday, cleaning,
personal hygiene, clothing, domestic appliances and domestic durables. Mentioned
consumption clusters account for around 95 per cent of environmental impacts from
household consumption, with the nutrition, housing and transport clusters accounting for 70
per cent of those impacts.
On the basis of a certain lifestyle, people make purchasing decisions, decisions about using
and disposal of products; how and how much they will use water, energy etc. and it all
affects sustainability (figure no. 1).

Source: Based on Bedford et al., p. 12
The literature mainly puts a stress on the consumer lifestyle. As a consumer, an individual
greatly contributes to sustainability by the way he or she behaves. An individual, however,
has other roles, too (figure no. 2). An individual is a family member, a member of the
organization (he or she works at), a member of the society (he or she lives in). All these
have an impact on how an individual behaves.

Consumer behavior is important, but it is not the most important. An individual has certain
attitudes to physical activity and, on the basis of those attitudes, he or she behaves in a
certain way (e.g. walks). An individual has certain attitudes to the social media and makes a
decision on whether he or she will spend time on social networks or not. Parents are those
who transfer attitudes, beliefs and values to children. An individual is a member of the
organization he or she works at. With his or her knowledge and attitudes, an individual can
have an influence on the sustainable behavior of organizations. An individual is a member
of the society he or she lives in. By performing his or her certain activities, an individual
can influence the sustainability of the society. In this paper, the significance of the
sustainable lifestyle of an individual (SLOI) is highlighted. The SLOI stands for the
sustainable pattern of the behavior of an individual in the family, the process of product
purchase and consumption, at work (at the organization he or she works) and the society
and the environment he or she lives and works.
The SLOI includes:
 the sustainable behavior of an individual as a member of the family – which is in
compliance with the sustainable family behavior,
 the sustainable behavior of an individual as a consumer – sustainable consumer
behavior,
 the sustainable behavior of an individual as an employee – which is in compliance
with sustainable organizational behavior,
 the sustainable behavior of an individual as a member of the society and the
environment – which is in compliance with the sustainable behavior of the society.
An individual’s behavior depends on the family he or she lives in, the organization he or
she works at, the environment and the society he or she lives in. On the other hand, an
individual can influence the behavior of the family he or she lives in, the organization he or
she works at, the environment and the society he or she lives in. For the total sustainability,
sustainable patterns of the behavior of all the actors are needed. Sustainability marketing
(Rakic and Rakic, 2015) and the sustainable lifestyle marketing of an individual
(SLMOI) can have an influence on the attitudes of actors to sustainable behavior and
sustainable patterns. (figure no. 3)
of the SLOI and sustainability
The SLMOI is directed towards the presentation, creation and maintenance of the SLOI. On
the basis of the definition of marketing of the American Marketing Association (AMA,
2013), the definition of the SLMOI has been derived. The SLMOI is the activity, a set of
institutions and processes for creating, communicating and maintaining the SLOI.
Governments, profit organizations; consumers; educational, health-care, non-profit and
various environmental organizations and the media are responsible for the SLMOI.

 Do business in compliance with the sustainable production patterns, and
 Make consumers and the public familiar with sustainable business.
Consumers can:
 In the process of purchasing and consuming, consumers can behave according to
sustainable consumer patterns,
 via WOM communications, the digital media and particularly the user-generated
(consumer-generated) media, consumers can create, share and comment on the content of
the sustainable patterns of behavior.
Apart from their respective responsibility for sustainable business, educational, healthcare, non-profit and various environmental organizations and the media are also
responsible for communicating the SLOI.

1.2. Profile of sustainability oriented consumers
Despite the controversy about their uses, socio-demographic variables (age, gender,
income, education etc.) can still be useful in understanding and predicting pro
environmental behaviours. General Environmental Responsiveness (GER) has a positive
relationship with age, suggesting that older people have a broader knowledge of
environmental responsibility (Wells et al., 2011). On the other hand, the results obtained by
the author in the research show that the younger consumer is more environmentally
conscious (Chen & Peng, 2012; Straughan and Roberts, 1999). Straughan and Roberts
(1999) say that age has been explored by a number of researchers and the general belief is
that younger individuals are likely to be more sensitive to environmental issues. Numerous
papers and studies confirm that females are more concerned than men about the
environment in relation to household behaviours (Bucic et al., 2012; Kalamas, Cleveland
and Laroche, 2013; Rezai et al., 2012; Straughan and Roberts, 1999; Subhani et al., 2012;
Wells et al., 2011). But, as is the case with age-based green research, the results of genderbased investigations are still far from conclusive (Straughan and Roberts, 1999).
Environmental sensitivity has a positive relationship with income (Bucic et al., 2012; Rezai
et al., 2012; Straughan and Roberts, 1999). GER also has a positive relationship with
education, so that more educated people are more socially responsible. The education of
individuals has a positive influence on individuals’ socially responsible behavior (Chen &
Peng, 2012). Consumer environmental attitudes and knowledge are two of the most
commonly cited influences on behaviour (Wells et al., 2011). There is evidently a great
deal of people’s awareness, concern and consciousness when the environment is concerned,
and they are the harbingers of our adopting a behavior that is environment-friendly (Wai
and Bojei, 2015). The consumer’s ecology-related behavior positively influences, and does
so to a significant extent, the consumer’s environmental consciousness (Ahmad et al.,
2012). Ahmad’s (et al., 2012) study points out the fact that one’s age, income and education
stand for determinant factors of environment-related behavior. For that reason, starting in
primary school, the consumer must educate him- or herself both formally and informally on
the basic ecological principles.

hypothesis:
H1.The younger the consumers, the more positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle
are.
H2.The higher the consumers’ incomes, the more positive attitudes towards sustainable
lifestyle are.
H3. The more educated the consumers are, the more positive attitudes towards sustainable
lifestyle are.
H4. The more activities are performed by the SLMOI (different actors, such as profit
organizations, the government; educational, health-care, non-profit and various
environmental organizations, the media), the more positive attitudes to a sustainable
lifestyle are.
H5. The more positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle are the greater effect on
sustainable behaviour they have.

2. Method
The starting point for the research of attitudes towards sustainable lifestyles and behaviours
on the basis of attitudes is represented by framework: resource flows and sustainability
impacts for lifestyle choice (see figure no. 1). Questionnaire consisted of a set of attitude
statements and questions related to decisions about purchasing, using and disposal of
products; using water, energy and other resources. 5-point Likert-type scale was used
(strongly agree = 5, strongly disagree =1). In the survey, we used personal interviewing. In
the survey, we used personal interviewing.
Starting attitude and behaviour statements are:
 Decisions about chosen products can affect sustainability.
 When making decision about purchasing I always choose products which positively
affect sustainability.
 Decisions about how products are used can affect sustainability.
 When making decision about using a product I always choose the way (of using a
product) which positively affects sustainability.
 Decisions about how products are disposed can affect sustainability.
 When making decision about product disposal I always choose the way (of product
disposal) which positively affects sustainability.
 Decisions about the way and the degree of utilisation of water, land, energy and
other resources can affect sustainability.
 When making decision about using water, land, energy and other resources I always
choose the way (water, land, energy and other resources) which positively affects
sustainability.

purchase, use and disposal of products; my use of water, energy and other resources.
The respondents who answered disagree or strongly disagree, were additionally asked an
open question – why?
The survey was conducted on the territory of the Republic of Serbia. Convenience sample
included 400 individuals between 16 and 74 years. Respondents, according to their age,
were divided into the following groups: 16-34 (20%), 35-54 (32%), 55-74 (48%).
According to sex, the sample consisted of 51% of women and 49% of men. According to
educational level, the respondents were grouped using EUROSTAT classification: 0-2
basic, lower secondary education (preschool education; primary education or first phase of
the primary education – first to fifth grade; lower high education – 6th to 9th grade); 3-4
higher secondary education (high school; - 1st to 4th grade; post secondary but not tertiary
education – first degree studies); 5-6 tertiary education (higher education, Master studies
and PhD studies). In the sample, 25% of respondents had lower than secondary education,
50% had secondary education and 25% had tertiary education. According to employment
status, the respondents were divided into following groups: employed (30%), unemployed
(25%), students (5%), other but unemployed (40%). According to income of the households
where they live, the respondents were divided into following groups: up to 300 euro (65%),
300-600 euro (20%), over 600 euro (15%).

3. Results
The results of the research show that 27% agree, and 16% strongly agree that decisions
about chosen products can affect sustainability.
Looking at the age of respondents, the younger the residents are, the stronger their attitudes
about the affect of chosen products on sustainability are, i.e. 19% (in the age group 16-34),
15% (35-54) and 9% (55-74) agree and strongly agree that decisions about chosen products
can affect sustainability. The results of the research confirm H1: The younger the
consumers, the more positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle are. It is a similar
situation with income and education.
According to income of the households where they live, the higher income the respondents
have, the attitudes towards the influence of chosen products on sustainability are stronger:
up to 300 euro (4%), 300-600 euro (16%), over 600 euro (23%) agree and strongly agree
that decisions about chosen products can affect sustainability. The results of the research
confirm H2:The higher the consumers’ incomes, the more positive attitudes towards
sustainable lifestyle are.
According to educational level, the more educated the respondents, the stronger their
attitudes towards the influence of chosen products on sustainability are, i.e. 2% (in the
group of respondents with lower than secondary education), 9% (in the group with
secondary education) and 32% (in the group with tertiary education) agree and strongly
agree that decisions about chosen products can affect sustainability. The results of the
research confirm H3: The more educated the consumers are, the more positive attitudes
towards sustainable lifestyle are.

(CSR) or Sustainability Reports (Albu et al., 2013) and present their activities in the field of
CSR and sustainability. In order to prove H4, the respondents were first asked whether they
had noticed some marketing activities of the organizations related to the sustainable
lifestyle of individuals. Then, the respondents whose answer to the question asked was
affirmative (i.e. those who had noticed the marketing activities of the organizations related
to sustainable lifestyle) were asked two additional questions: 1) which marketing activities
they had noticed and 2) how those marketing activities had influenced their attitudes and
behavior. From the aspect of the product categories, the respondents noticed the marketing
activities of the organizations in the fields of healthy food (63%), organic food (47%),
physical activities (39%) and hybrid automobiles (28%). From the aspect of the types of
organizations, the respondents noticed the following:
 presenting numerous organizations (different actors, such as profit organizations, the
government; educational, health-care, non-profit and various environmental organizations,
the media) as socially responsible ones (on the basis of aid provided for certain groups of
people and the local community; recycling etc.);
 the promotion of the producers and distributors of healthy and organic food;
 the promotion of the producers and distributors of products and services in the field
of the physical activity;
 government campaigns oriented towards abandoning smoking, health checks, the
prevention of diseases etc.;
 educational organizations that, in various manners, attribute ever greater significance
to researching into sustainability (from teaching units, via subjects to the establishment of
faculties);
 health-care organizations’ campaigns presenting behavior patterns with the aim to
prevent diseases;
 promotional activities of non-profit and various environmental organizations, and
 the media contents dedicated to sustainability.
The research results show that 34% of the respondents agree and 29% strongly agree that
the marketing activities of the organizations related to the sustainable lifestyle of
individuals have an impact on the creation, maintenance and further transfer of positive
attitudes of a sustainable lifestyle. The results of the research confirm H4: The more
activities are performed by the SLMOI (different actors, such as profit organizations, the
government; educational, health-care, non-profit and various environmental organizations,
the media), the more positive attitudes to a sustainable lifestyle are.
However, positive attitudes towards the influence of chosen products on sustainability are
not followed by the similar behaviour. The research results are not in accordance with H5:
The more positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle are the greater effect on
sustainable behaviour they have. That is, only 25% of respondents always choose products
which positively affect sustainability. To the additional question why they do not buy
products which positively affect sustainability, the majority (87%) respond that they do not
have enough income. Other reasons are: high price of sustainable products (82%),

unavailability of products in retail stores (23%). It is interesting that income is pointed out
as the key reason for the differences between the attitudes and behaviour. The respondents
say that they know the organic food is incomparably better, but also more expensive so they
cannot afford it. Also, as a similar example, the respondents point out electric automobiles.
Considering the fact that the majority of respondents pointed out high price as a problem,
they were presented the opportunities which led to a lower price of products (shifts towards
efficient and collaborative consumption etc.) and they were asked additional questions –
Why do not you redirect yourself towards efficient and collaborative consumption? Why do
not you use public transport instead of your own car? Why do not you decrease the
consumption of water? The most common responses were: hard to change habits, life and
consumption patterns (89%); insufficient knowledge about the effects on sustainability
(57%). As much as 43% of respondents responded with another question – why would I use
public transport instead of my own car? This tells about the insufficient awareness of the
influence of population on sustainability.
Avita (et al., 2015) has conducted an exploration of the relative importance of the price for
an individual making decisions on sustainable food. The results obtained reveal that to
define the consumer’s willingness to pay for sustainable food the relevant role of the price
must be taken into account; for that reason, the organic- and integrated-food market may be
forced to more adequately adjust the price so as to reach the wide-ranging consumer.
The responses related to attitudes and behaviours about the way of products’ using and
disposal, as well as about the way and the degree of using water, land, energy and other
resources are similar to the above mentioned responses about the choice of products.

4. Discussion
On the basis of the results of the research, it can be concluded that the four starting
hypothesis are confirmed, but not the fifth one. The younger the consumers, the more
positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle are. The higher the consumers’ incomes, the
more positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle are. The more educated the consumers
are, the more positive attitudes towards sustainable lifestyle are. The more activities are
performed by the SLMOI (different actors, such as profit organizations, the government;
educational, health-care, non-profit and various environmental organizations, the media),
the more positive attitudes to a sustainable lifestyle are. However, more positive attitudes
towards sustainable lifestyle do not always mean their stronger influence on sustainable
behaviour. Of course, a logical question can be put – why and when? The key answer is –
income. The fifth hypothesis is confirmed only in the segment of the respondents with
higher income. So, people can be aware of the significance and importance of choosing
products, the way of using and disposing products; as well as of the way and the degree of
using water, land, energy and other resources, but often people do not have income high
enough for socially responsible behaviour. An additional problem is the lack of availability
in distribution channels. Particular problems are “rooted” life and consumption patterns and
insufficient knowledge about the influence on sustainability.
In order to change everything and direct it towards sustainability, a long-term process of
creation of sustainable lifestyles is needed. The key changes are: economic environment

environment (which directs all actors towards socially responsible behaviour), attitudes “mindset” and behaviours of all actors (creation of “sustainable mindset” - from
governments, organisations to families and individuals), patterns of life and consumption.
The above mentioned changes lead to sustainable lifestyles of all actors (figure no. 4).

Figure no. 4: The key changes in the process of creation of SLOI
Subsidies and supportive policies should also be offered by governments for the purpose of
strengthening the industrial sector in effectively promoting green products. In that way, the
non-green preferential segment’s preferences towards such green products, which is subject
to bargain-basement in fixing the price of the green product (Biswas and Roy, 2015).
Social innovations are needed. There is an increase in the number of the movements,
initiatives, entrepreneurs and new business models whose goal is to enable sustainability in
how we consume products and services, how we live and move. The following examples
include:
 Shifting to efficient consumption (wasting less), different consumption (shifting to
high-quality goods and services), and sufficient consumption (reducing material
consumption) – they are a demonstration of opportunities regarding how to sustainably
utilize products and services.
 Collaborative consumption (sharing, swapping, trading, etc.) discloses shifting in
preferences away from ownership of goods to “access” to goods and services and from
behaving as the passive consumer to becoming the co-producers of goods and services (e.g.
urban farming; growing one’s own food).
 Change in household behavior so as to conserve energy and invest in energy
efficiency signals, one’s increasing awareness and readiness to move on to more
sustainable ways of living.

towards walking, cycling and public transit and new technologies, too, such as electric
vehicles.
 The community and the city action show successful participatory approaches to
sustainable, long-term living and the mobility options such as ecotowns, sustainable city
initiatives and Transition Towns.
 Promising synergies keep coming to surface for health, equity and well-being by reexamining the way we live, eat and move.
 The co-creation strategy, in which those affected by a development (e.g. investors,
firms, governments, citizens) interact, share, learn and develop technologies, products,
concepts, services, or neighborhoods in a way that enables them to have the value created
for all (Backhaus et al., 2011).
In order to enable the development of context-customized instrument packages applying a
spectrum of tools (such as regulatory, economic, information) to make an influence on
various stakeholders and target groups, systemic and holistic approaches through a multistakeholder involvement are required (Backhaus et al., 2011).

Conclusions
This article contributes to the extant literature by emphasizing the impact of the SLMOI on
the SLOI, the interconnectedness of the SLMOI and the SLOI, and their mutual impact on
sustainability. Playing different roles (as a member of the family, an employee, a consumer
and a member of the society and the environment) an individual may have an impact on
sustainability by expressing his/her attitudes and by his/her behavior. By conducting
marketing activities, organizations may have an impact on an individual’s sustainable
behavior. These are the key conclusions. First, the SLOI is the goal of the SLMOI, and
sustainability is the SLOI’s goal. Second, a long-term process of sustainable lifestyles
creation is needed. Third, a holistic approach is necessary – numerous actors – from
governments, organizations, families to individuals have to take part in the process of
creation of sustainable attitudes - “mindset” and behaviours.
A long-term process of sustainable lifestyles creation is needed, as well as the engagement
of numerous actors, because the changes of economic and legal environment, life patterns,
attitudes and behaviour of people are necessary. The basis is made of changes in the
economic environment, i.e. the increase of the gross domestic product of country and the
income of population. Legal environment by laws and regulations forces all actors to
behave in a socially responsible manner. Informed, educated, younger and the customers
who have enough purchasing power, are more oriented towards sustainable lifestyles. It is
necessary to educate the population in order to change existing unsustainable patterns of
behaviour, and to make them realise and accept sustainable lifestyles. It is necessary to
create opportunities that citizens can get income and increase purchasing power.
Observed from the point of view of the protection of the consumer, Popescu et al. (2010)
deems education for healthy consumption to be a suitable answer capable of generating a
long-lasting change in the present pattern, striving to a more generous consumption, if it is

quality of the life of coexisting generations that also succeed one another.
The practical implications of this paper reflect in that the study results recommend a
change in the existing patterns of behavior, starting the process of creating and maintaining
the SLOI on the basis of the SLMOI of different actors and actors’ activities in the longterm process of the creation of sustainable lifestyles. The foundations of the patterns of a
sustainable behavior lie in education, income, positive attitudes towards a sustainable
lifestyle and the SLMOI of different actors. On the basis of the above mentioned it can be
concluded that education of population is needed so that they accept sustainable lifestyles.
Also, the change of existing patterns of behaviour is needed as well as the increase of
income of the population. The following activities of actors in the long-term process of
creation of sustainable lifestyles stand out:
 Governments through laws and regulations create legal environment which directs
organisations and population towards sustainable behaviour.
 Governments create conditions for the increase of GDP of country, profit of
companies and income of population. Population with low income has only one aim:
survival. It further means that it is necessary to create conditions and opportunities for
organisations in order to increase their revenues and profit, and population to increase its
income.
 Education, health, non-profit and various environmental organisations through
their daily activities and additional campaigns educate people about sustainable lifestyle.
For some daily activities of individuals, income is not the only problem, but ignorance – for
example, some individuals do not know the proper diet. Improper diet leads to numerous
diseases and other individual, family and social problems. Awareness of investment (larger)
of income into sustainable and not into materialistic lifestyle is necessary. UNEP (2000)
emphasises the importance of education for sustainable consumption. Education is one of
the most powerful tools to support individuals in making the right and more responsible
choices while meeting their needs and aspirations. ESC is essential to empower individuals
and social groups with appropriate information on the impacts of their daily choices as
consumers, as well as for workable solutions and alternatives. ESC aims at providing
knowledge, values and skills to enable individuals and social groups to become actors of
change towards more sustainable consumption behaviors (UNEP, 2010, p. 4, 11).
 Media transmit messages about sustainable lifestyle every day. Media have great
power and can significantly contribute to the creation of sustainable culture. “If television
could transform the entire planet into a global materialistic consumer culture within just 50
years, it could also be used to efficiently promote alternative non-materialistic lifestyles and
sustainable consumption.” (Huesemann and Huesemann 2008: p. 815).
 The change of attitudes and behaviours of organisations - sustainable production
and consumption (of organisations).
 The change of attitudes and behaviours of population – sustainable lifestyle of
population - everyday sustainable activities of population – from rational usage of water,
energy and other resources; over ways of food preparation and consumption; the choice
using and disposal of products; to recreational, sport and many more other daily activities.

and suggestions for future research. First, the research has been done in a single country.
Future researches might be conducted in a larger number of countries in different contexts.
That would also enable the carrying out of a comparative analysis of the impacts of the
SLMOI, the SLOI and sustainability on and between each other in different contexts.
Second, a general impact of the SLMOI on the SLOI has been researched into. Future
researches might be focused on certain types of organizations, i.e. on the measuring and
ranking of the impact of the SLMOI of different types of organizations as well as their
integrated impact on the SLOI and sustainability. Third, the attitudes of the population
towards sustainable lifestyles and the SLMOI (performed by different actors) and behaviors
on the basis of attitudes have been researched into. Future researches might be oriented
towards measuring the contributions of individuals in different roles (as a member of the
family, an employee, a consumer and a member of the society and the environment).
a new conceptual and methodological approach. Ecological Economics, 84, pp. 74-83.
