
Introduction

World countries have been facing many ups and downs recently, which, in a global economy
that has become more and more integrated, stimulated interest for economic security and forced its
redefinition. At the same time, they encouraged the search for political prescriptions to strengthen
and increase economic security in the new environment. Globalization, undermining the old
definition of economic security, can be found in the centre of the new definition which needs to
encompass the causal consequences of globalization and establish explicit reference criteria to
account for its effects on economic security (Kahler, 2005, p. 23).
At present, more than ever, economic relations between states are the ones that define the
general character of the relations between them. Conflicts nowadays are less about ideologies and
taking over state power, and more about the fight to control or obtain resources, controlling territories
rich in mineral resources and other valuable goods or routes on which they are brought on the market
(Renner, 2002, p. 10).
Economic security is not a new concern for the government, economic instruments being part
of the statecraft set of instruments for a long time now, a means to influence other states and their
policies (Kahler, 2005, pp. 23-24). International relations analysts that have always acknowledged
weapon power did not succeed in reaching a consensus on the importance, usefulness and definition
of economic statecraft. Realists contested the usefulness and power of economic statecraft with
respect to the normalization of international relations. Neoliberal criticism addressing the realist

behaviour of collaboration between states against the background of higher prices for escaping this
system of relations. Moreover, relations of increased economic interdependency boost the number
and chances of coercive, yet non-violent policies that may be used. Simultaneously, these
interdependencies may deepen the differences between developed, stronger states and the less
developed, weaker ones.
The process of globalization, the movement towards a global economy with respect to the sector
of goods, services and capital turns the integration of the economic dimension in national security
policies into a need. Last but not least, economic performance is the one that mostly determines the
military capabilities of a country and the citizens’ welfare (Posen and Tarullo, 2005, p. 3).

Theoretical perspectives on economic security
Starting from Baldwin’s statement (1997, p. 12) who claimed that security is a confusing
concept, thus requiring further clarification, we may say that economic security is also a controversial
concept, with political influences, yet its existence itself in a capitalism system was questioned, given
the fact that agents need to be unsure on the market, otherwise the market would be inefficient (ILO,
2004, p. 5-17).
Buzan (1998, p. 95) feels that economic security is located in the intense debates which regard
the relations between the anarchical political structure and the economic structure of the market.
Various approaches have in view the position of states and societies in relation to the markets’, as
well as the situation in which individual economic actors have their own demands and their relation
with the markets.
In Hough’s (2008, pp. 108-111) opinion, the study of world economy is based on three main
approaches that, besides being paradigms for its conceptualization, may be understood as ideologies
for the increase of economic security. Moreover, economic security, may be achieved twofold: from
a liberal viewpoint through a more intense globalization and from a mercantilist perspective through
less globalization; and from a Marxist perspective with a radical change at world level. With respect
to this, the various ideological positions generate different visions on the priorities of the economic
security discourse. However, at present, this discourse is shaped by the liberal agenda and the
consequences of its implementation in the field of commerce, production and finance. (Buzan et al.,
1998, p. 96).

as well as the strategic environment in which they are found (Kolodziej, 1992, p. 422). However, it
is important to avoid the exaggeration of the notion of economic security so as not to include all
economic risks as they might complicate the elaboration of security policies in an interdependent
world economy. This requires a more careful conceptualization of economic security, although it is
equally vital to avoid an extremely narrow definition which would normalise peculiar security
concerns of a state for all states and societies (Nesadurai, 2005, p. 5).
Traditionally, economy caught the eye of national security by the impact it had on financing
defence capacities and ensuring an innovative and efficient war industry, as well as the use of
economic sanctions or other non-military instruments. Long-term success of national power depended
on the capacity of the state to create and sustain a performance economy and a sustainable economic
growth.
Buzan (1991a, p. 19) states that economic security is related to the access to resources, finance
and markets which are needed to support acceptable wealth and power levels in the state.
Furthermore, Tsereteli (2008, p. 16), with a similar approach, points out that the concept of economic
security refers to long-term security of the access to economic opportunities in markets and resources
such as people (human capital), capital, energy, water, technology and education. This concept is
critical for individuals and nations, only free people being able to build free societies, their freedom
drawing on the individuals’ economic security. Long-term internal stability of each state is the key
factor for national security. However, there is no stability without economic growth and opportunities
for natural persons to freely choose economic activities.
Dick Nanto believes that economy is part of the debate on security due to three overlapping
roles. The first role aims at economy as source of funding, materials and personnel for military power.
The second role deals with economy as a provider of economic security and wealth, and the third one
envisages economy as foundation for the interaction between states and common or concurring
interests.
Still, from the viewpoint of nation overall, economic security has a wider sense; thus, the role
of economy within national security can be regarded from a macroeconomic and microeconomic
perspective. From a macroeconomic viewpoint, the problematic addresses budget and diminution of
shortfall. The microeconomic perspective focuses on ensuring general wealth conditions to people
and the support of other components of national security. Economy lies at the basis of each of them
by the supply of funds, human resources and other, capital, products, not to mention culture and an

An operational economy is based, in its turn, on fiscal, governmental, monetary and industrial
policies, the quality and the amount of human resources, the progress recorded in the field of science
and technology, commerce and international capital flows.
In addition, economic security is the existence of necessary means and opportunities to ensure
their own welfare within an economic system which is vibrant, accessible and grows steadily. This
corresponds to stable revenues, a job or entrepreneurial support to maintain what someone considers
being an acceptable standard of living. At the same time, the vague concept of economic security is
more dangerous, perhaps, when it lacks during recessions, high unemployment periods and
bankruptcy and when there is a gap between economic expectancies and reality. As far as the state is
concerned, long-term security greatly depends on the assurance of a dynamic and growing economy
(Nanto, 2011, pp. 1-16).

Economic security and the globalization process

In the past years economic, social, political and technological developments stressed insecurity
worldwide. World economy became more integrated and more unstable. The increase of global
interdependency leads to the increase of vulnerability in economies, whereas a higher economic
specialisation induced by commerce (based on the “comparative advantage” principle) sometimes
implies painful adjusting from the part of workers and communities which inevitably produce
insecurity. Moreover, there has been a high increase of capital flows which became more volatile.
Simultaneously, developing countries face superior and more volatile capital flows and their capacity
to face them via controls and restrictions was constantly damaged. The financial market recorded a
considerable integration which affected the autonomy of political decision at the national level.
World economy became more predisposed to economic crises, deep recessions which imply
their sudden spread from a country or region of the world to others. Economic liberalization was
accompanied by a growth of systemic shocks which triggered a systemic insecurity, hard to cover via
standard insurance forms. Along with globalization, economic crises from a country or region have
higher chances to influence other economies. “Contagion” became a fear for all world countries – for
instance, further to the crisis of the August 1998 Russian debt, two of the most affected countries in
the world were Brazil and Argentina, even if their economic relations with Russia were almost
inexistent (ILO, 2004, pp. 21-39).

Economic security does not stop at the regular fluctuations in the GDP, workforce occupancy,
productivity and other indicators that have been major concerns of the specialists in economy for
decades and are still in the pipeline for academic studies in the field. In the present context, economic
security refers to capital flows worldwide and capital markets and products that are the object of these
flows. Through these channels, currencies may be destroyed, inflation passed on, stocks exhausted,
and financial institutions destabilized.
At the same time, Kahler (2005, pp. 24-25) identifies three arguments that support globalization
as far as economic security is concerned. First, governments, even the ones that sustained the
traditional approach of international policy dominated by military force saw the links with global
economy as strengths for national economy, technological structure and, ultimately, their military
power. The ones that rejected an extended international economic exchange risked conventional
military inferiority.
Moreover, globalization had the effect of reducing vulnerability by diversifying suppliers and
markets, and the unilateral application of economic sanctions became more difficult, thus diminishing
the states’ vulnerability. Furthermore, economic liberalization meant that all governments gave up
part of their influence on private economic agents, thus reducing the efficiency of statecraft economic
instruments. On the long term, economic integration could also aim at a deeper transformation,
leading to a redefinition of a vision on national security, a less militarised one.
Globalization brought into discussion new definitions of economic security centred on two
types of flows: illicit flows that are harder to control and can easily take the shape of legitimate
economic transactions (terrorism, crime, pollution) and economic shocks (financial, to a great extent)
that may undermine economic growth, raise inequality and threaten political stability.
Helen Nesadurai (2005) proposes a comprehensive approach of the concept of economic
security to consider socio-economic aspects, as well. But on the other hand, comprehensive concerns
of economic security focus on the demands of sustainable economic development as means of
promoting socio-economic progress. They usually encourage a positive perspective, aiming at the
economic interdependence between states which is considered as facilitator when complementary
economic interests need following via international economic integration (Boutin, 2014, pp. 8-9).
Besides the economic power that state elites have the intention of ensuring within the political
competition between states, three other economic values that states and communities should ensure
in a globalized world may be identified. These economic values are represented by the assurance of

distribution. These three values are an alternative conception of economic security, one that is able to
consider the realities of global capitalism.
In this alternative approach economic security comprises a microeconomic and macroeconomic
component. The microeconomic one focuses on the individual, as main referent of security, with the
purpose of ensuring revenue security, as well as access to a level of consumption able to assure basic
human and family needs. The macroeconomic component refers to the assurance of integrity or
robustness of the market to generate economic growth and welfare in society. This may be achieved
by ensuring the necessary number of institutions on the market, including a system of property rights
and contracts which grant equal access to natural persons for the exploitation of economic
opportunities. Economic security is also touched via an equitable distribution system which is now
acknowledged as vital for assuring the political stability of capitalism. This economic stability of
economic security speaks beyond the world of inter-state rivalry and political power. However, the
traditional realist approach needn’t be abandoned as it may be representative for some states in certain
moments of time (Nesadurai, 2005, p. 13-14).

Conclusions

In a globalized world with an increasing number of players on the international scene (states,
multinationals and various international organizations) and a growing interdependence, the economic
security it is no longer an issue that concerns the internal state policy only. To a certain extent,
economic security became a factor of stability or instability regarding political-military conflicts. As
a result, the economic dimension gained an increasing role in the political matters leading to changes
with respect to resolution methods, from “reactive to preventive” ones (Kuznetsov et al., 2010, p. 26).
“Geoeconomics” replaces geopolitics and becomes the key concern of the main actors on the
international scene, economic power being acknowledged as essential in the determination of primacy
or subordination of states in the international system (Nesadurai, 2005, p. 4).
Significant changes on the international scene, the intensification of globalization, the increase
of economic interdependencies, technological development and the IT revolution led to a widening
of the concept of economic security. Economic security does not stop at ensuring access to resources,
markets and financing of military capacities or the use of economic statecraft elements. The
integration and interdependencies of global economy, product and capital flows, the multitude of

sector regarding welfare, security and development of societies establish the dimensions of the
concept of economic security.
Moreover, despite the process of globalization and erosion of state institutions, by the
occurrence of new international actors, state institutions remain key providers of economic security.
However, in light of the new international environment states need to cooperate between them, with
regional and global actors and to evolve in order to face the challenges imposed by the new threats
on economic security.
The process of globalization contributed to a change on the concept of economic security, not
only that we have a wider and more complex approach with an increased number of involved actors
but also a reconsideration of the threats.
Last but not the least, the importance of economic security is given by the implications that the
economic component has in the process that ensures the national security, as a generator factor and
constraint element with respect to its achievement. In this context, economic security became an
important, dynamic and complex concept, that needs to face the challenges of the new international
environment, although, the idea of economic security remains one full of “contradictions and
paradoxes” (Buzan, 1991b: 445).

Acknowledgement

This work was cofinanced from the European Social Fund through Sectoral Operational
Programme

Human

Resources

Development

2007-2013,

project

number

POSDRU/159/1.5/S/134197 „Performance and excellence in doctoral and postdoctoral research in
Romanian economic sciences domain”.

at: http://www.silkroadstudies.org/resources/pdf/SilkRoadPapers/2008_03_SRP_Tsereteli
