

competitive market atmosphere due to lack of accessible resources. Loss of profit due
to late supply of remanufactured products to market, customer defection, and other
unpredictable penalties are some common consequences of inadequate response of
remanufacturing operations that can impact the business system. Common strategies
for prediction, planning, scheduling, and timing of remanufacturing operations for core
arrivals that are based on traditional central tendency approaches, such as modelling of
arrivals by Poisson or Normal distributions, are not sufficient in cases of extremely
large or extremely small arrivals of cores. These scenarios can be considered as shock
waves to a remanufacturing facility and consequently to its business system.
In this paper, the stochastic behaviour of remanufacturing systems under extreme situations is investigated and a statistical model is developed and applied on an industrial
case. Triage as a sorting strategy is based on statistical models of extreme core arrivals,
which are formulated from Extreme Value (EV) theory and related Generalized Extreme
Value (GEV) and Fréchet (Fisher-Tippett type-II) distributions. The validity of the
model is tested by hypothesis testing and comparisons between common, central tendency, and less-likely but adverse extremal tendency are made. Lastly, it is suggested
that the EV approach in remanufacturing core management and sorting issues should
be considered as a complementary sorting strategy to central tendency approaches in
order to have a sufficient level of preparedness for extremal situations. Triage is a typical approach in medicine to address extremal situations, so, a generic analogy between
medical triage and remanufacturing triage is described and a generic framework for triage strategy development is introduced.
The next section introduces triage as a complementary core sorting strategy and creates an analogy between remanufacturing triage and triage in medicine. The methodology section presents common statistical models of EV distributions and a brief
simulation-based verification case study. The results section applies the developed
methods on a data set from an industrial valve shop. Finally, in the discussion section,
a generic triage method selection framework is proposed.

Triage as a complementary core sorting strategy

According to current studies and reports, triage is used in some remanufacturing facilities
as a core inspection strategy [3], as a part of their main sorting strategy for individual or
bulk return that can be as much as 30,000 returns per week, and as an inaccurate but
quick and profitable sorting method when the sorting, disposal, and transportation costs
are reasonable in comparison to disassembly and reprocessing costs [4]. In medicine, triage is a common patient prioritization and sorting technique based on the gravity of
health conditions and availability of medical resources such as, operational resources,
manpower, and time. This agile sorting and prioritization technique is of special significance when the normal balance between existing resources and the number of patient arrivals is extremely disturbed.
Medical triage can be defined as, “the process of determining the priority of patients’
treatments based on the severity of their condition”. This rations patient treatment efficiently when resources are limited or insufficient for all to be treated immediately. Historically, medical triage has been developed based on various approaches, summarized


Table 1 Proposed analogy between medical triage and remanufacturing triage
Method

Medicine

Proposed remanufacturing
equivalence

Prioritizing
factor

Traditional

Little or no formal effort to provide
care

No prioritized core sortation

No criteria

Baron
Recognition, evaluation and
Dominique-Jean categorization, treatment of the most
Larry
urgent cases regardless of ranking and
deferring less or fatally wounded cases

Condition assessment and processing,
the most in demand cores have top
priority

Market pull

Wilson

Concentration of treatment on most
likely successful cases, some low
chance cases will die

Concentrated remanufacturing on
Likelihood
cores with high remanufacturability No of success
chance of second life for less
remanufacturable cores

First Come First
Served (FCFS)

Treatment based on order of arrival,
regardless of gravity of wounds, rank
or any other criteria

Remanufacturing is only based on core Order of
arrival order without any other criteria arrival
and means equal chance for all for
second life

Great Goodness Depriving of urgent cases needing
for Greatest
huge amount of attention, time and
Number (GGGN) resources in favor of dozens of other
cases

Remanufacturing dozens of cores with Number of
high remanufacturability instead of one treatment
needing great amount of resources

Less Severity
First Treatment
(LSFT)

Prioritizing less urgent cases since they Prioritization of cores with less defects
can be treated swiftly and can return
regardless of other criteria
to action

Less
defects

Maximize the
Fighting
Strength (MFS)

Most quick return to duty with least
expenditure of time and resources

Time

Swift response to market demand and
minimization of remanufacturing time,
customer urgent requirements

concept of medical triage began in the armed forces [5] where medical demands were
extremely greater than available resources. This situation in remanufacturing is equivalent to any situation that disturbs the normally expected stream of cores and creates an
extreme core flow to a remanufacturing facility, resulting in an exorbitant gap between
the arrival rate and core handling capacity of remanufacturing operations.
One of the goals of sorting of cores based on triage is providing a complementary
sorting tool to be utilized along with a primary sorting strategy, such as central tendency sorting approaches. The use of triage sorting is contingent upon the extreme arrivals of cores that can be interpreted as severe unbalance between core arrival and
facility remanufacturing capacity. Hence, considering triage as a complementary strategy of core sorting management may be of interest for some facilities, especially those
having unexpected, extreme core arrivals. The flowchart in Fig. 1 shows a typical core
reverse supply chain in remanufacturing industry under normal operations, but this
status can be disrupted by an extreme shock wave of arrivals.

Methodology
In most investigations in remanufacturing, the focus is on central tendency approaches
to deal with remanufacturing core management. Galbreth and Blackburn used normally

Fig. 1 Typical core reverse supply chain

hydrology engineering, earthquakes for structural engineering, fatigue strength in extreme mechanical loading, and extreme temperature variations in meteorology [10, 11].
Each of these instances address unusual, extreme value behaviour and not normal behaviours. Other applications in the field of strength of material, electrical engineering, highway traffic modelling, corrosion resistance, and pollution studies have also been reported
[12].
Although extreme arrivals of remanufacturing cores are not frequent, they still have
some probability of occurrence, and in the case of ignoring such events, remanufacturing systems may incur significant losses. In this research, the nature and behaviour of
extreme value core arrivals are studied based on Extreme Value Analysis and a statistical model is developed. Classical EV theory is presented in many statistics resources
[10–12]. The foundation of EV theory is the study of the statistical nature and behaviour of maxima, shown below as:
Mn ¼ maxfX 1 ; X 2 ; …; X n g
Where, {X1, X2, …, Xn}, is a set of randomly distributed variables with common distribution function F. It should be noted that the distribution must be common but not of
a specific type. Since Mn is the maximum of the observed data, the distribution of Mn,
confirms:
PðM n < zÞ ¼ PðX 1 ≤z; …; X n ≤zÞ ¼ P ðX 1 ≤zÞ…PðX n ≤zÞ ¼ ðF ðzÞÞn
Since F is the parent data distribution, it is necessary to estimate F from an available
set of sample data in order to study Mn. One common approach to estimate, F(F(z))n,
is using extreme data. This idea is similar to that used in estimation procedure of the
sample mean average. It is noteworthy that, since F(z) < 1, then for z < zsup, where zsup,
is the smallest value of z such that, F(z) = 1, F n ðzÞ →n→∞ 0, this issue is resolved by defining another variable such as, M Ã ¼ Mn −bn , where {an}, {bn}, are sequences of constants
n
an

Page 5 of 13

Theorem: If there exist sequences of constants {an} and {bn} such that
&
'
M n −bn
n→∞
P
≤z → GðzÞ
an
Where G(z) is a non-degenerate distribution function, then G(z) will belong to one of
the following distribution types (Table 2), for more details refer to [10, 11]. Table 2,
presents three types of EV distributions with corresponding domains of random variables and names.
In all distributions, a is positive and b is real. In the second and third distributions
α > 0. The presented three distributions belong to one family of distributions called Extreme Value distributions. These three distributions are the only possible limits for the
distribution of normalized extremes (maxima or minima) and does not depend on the
distribution, F, of parent data set.
A common approach in EV theory is combining the three forms of the distribution
family into one simple form, called the Generalized Extreme Value, GEV distribution
and is presented as follows:
& 

−1=ξ '
;z > b
GðzÞ ¼ exp − 1 þ ξ z−μ
σ
À
Á
In the generalized format of extreme value distribution, ξ z−μ σ > 0 and ξ, μ, σ are
three parameters of the GEV distribution. These three parameters and associated domains are summarized in Table 3.
The GEV converts to Fréchet distribution if the shape factor is positive, and converts
to the Weibull distribution if it is negative. For Gumble type, shape factor is approaching zero. The basic advantage of unified GEV format vs. three individual distribution format is the simplification of statistical analysis. Figure 2, illustrates the three
types of GEV distributions, Type-I, Gumble, has no upper or lower limiting values,
Weibull has just upper limiting value with no lower limiting value, and Fréchet type
has lower limiting value and no limiting value in right hand side, respectively.
In order to apply the above results to a set of independent, identically distributed, iid,
random variables like X1, X2, …, Xn, the first step is blocking the data set into n blocks
of observations, provided that n should be sufficiently large. Then maxima zi of each
block is screened and eventually the appropriate GEV distribution can be fitted to the
maxima {z1,z2, …, zi}. The estimation of distribution parameters in most cases is done
by maximum likelihood estimator method, MLE, but other methods can be used, see
[10, 11], in this research due to popularity, the estimation of parameters are conducted
Table 2 Three types of extreme value distributions
Extremals


I

Gumble

II

Frechet (Fisher-Tippet)


Page 6 of 13

Table 3 The three parameters of the GEV distribution
Parameter

Symbol

Domain

Location

μ

(−∞,+∞)

Scale

σ

(0,+∞)

Shape

ξ

(−∞,+∞)

by MLE. At this stage and prior to the analysis of the industrial valve remanufacturing
case, the model is applied to a simulated hurricane data set generated by the US Information Technology Laboratory [13]. Cumulative distribution functions for both EV and
central tendency approaches are presented in Fig. 3.
As it can be observed from Fig. 3, the normal distribution predicts zero probability
for occurrences above 80 units of wind speed. However, an examination of the data set
reveals that there are 35 cases out of 1000 that have hurricane speeds of more than 80
and less than 100 units of speed, and the total number of exceeding over 80 is 43 out
of 1000.

Results
The EV approach to core arrival characterization is illustrated with a case study of industrial valve repair/remanufacturing operations. Industrial valves are mechanical devices usually used in connection with pressurized vessels to stop or regulate flow.
Safety and relief valves, steam traps, and control valves are three kinds of industrial
valves that are widely used in chemical complexes. Safety valves are vital to protecting
people and physical assets, and steam traps have the duty of discharging condensate
and non-condensable gases from piping systems [14]. Valve maintenance and repair/
remanufacturing (repair is an equivalent term used for remanufacturing in valve industry [15]) is of critical importance from both safety and economic perspectives.
Valve arrival data collection was conducted based on formally issued organizational
work orders through a Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS) in a


Fig. 3 CDFs of simulated hurricane speeds for Milepost 2700

remanufacturing and their arrivals to the valve shop is determined based on various dominating factors such as; results of sophisticated condition assessments, calendar-based Preventive Maintenance (PM), premature failures such as jamming and leakage, requests or
requirements of operational units, partial or full overhauls, Opportunity-based Maintenance
(OM), safety, and economic considerations. It should be noted that the approximate mean
remanufacturing capacity of the valve shop is 10 valves per operational day. The investigation period includes all major arrivals listed in Table 4 except full overhauls. There are some
arrivals of small quantity, like arrivals due to preventative maintenance plans, premature
failures, operational requirements, OM requests, and some small revamps. These small arrivals may be expected or unexpected. Condition assessment of steam traps was conducted
by unit operators, thus, degrees of human error factors were experienced. As a result, condition assessment of steam traps was included in maintenance activities and outsourced in
order to achieve more reliable assessments and enhance energy management in the steam
network. Ultrasonic condition assessments eliminated many human errors, however, an
increase in valve arrivals to the repair shop were observed. Industrial disasters were usually
followed by management enforcements to take more efficient preventive actions that, in
turn, increased levels of extreme safety and relief valve arrivals. Assumptions made in this
case study are as follows, it is assumed that the inspection process is error proof, quality of
Table 4 Summary of factors affecting valve arrivals
Arrival determining factor

Nature of core arrival

Variable type

Amount

Preventive maintenance

Preplanned/prescheduled

Deterministic

Usually small

Outsourced condition assessments

Preplanned/prescheduled

Stochastic

Extremely huge

Premature failures

Unexpected

Stochastic

Usually small

Operational units

Unexpected

Stochastic

Usually small

Partial/Full overhaul

Preplanned/prescheduled

Stochastic

Extremely huge

Opportunistic maintenance

Unexpected

Stochastic

Usually small

Post-disaster preventive actions

Unexpected

Stochastic

Extremely huge

Revamps

Preplanned/prescheduled


cores are assumed to be equal and at such levels requiring complete disassembly and testing, and quantity of arrivals is considered as the sole uncertainty parameter.
The investigation period is divided to 158 three-day sub-periods and every 4 subperiods are considered as one block. Maxima of these blocks are extracted as block
maxima. Hence, there are 39 blocks and a half block, here for simplicity, the half block
is treated as a full block. Figure 4 depicts a scatter plot of the maximum values of the
blocks. Extreme values observed in this scatter plot are attributable to reasons such as;
post-disaster preventive actions, partial overhauls, outsourced condition assessments,
or a combination of factors.
Table 5 presents the descriptive statistics for parent and block maxima data sets. Note
that in the EV approach, the type of distribution for the parent sample, from which the
maxima blocks are generated, is not of great concern. Figure 5, shows the histogram of
maxima blocks.
The extracted maxima of blocks were used to estimate the three parameters of the
GEV distribution. Table 6 presents the estimation results yielded by the Maximum
Likelihood Method (MLE). The corresponding confidence intervals are included. For
the purpose of comparison, results from the Probability Weighted Method (PWM) are
also presented.
Figure 6 shows the cumulative distribution function plot for GEV, Experimental
Cumulative Distribution Function (ECDF), and two central tendency distributions,
Normal and Poisson. Distribution parameters for both central tendency distributions
were estimated from the parent data set.
The conformance between the ECDF generated from actual data set and the GEV
model can be seen in Fig. 6. This conformance is critical in extreme values of arrivals
and is the main motivation for using the GEV. Further investigations reveal that in the
case of non-extreme, usual arrivals, there is an observed conformance between Poisson
and ECDF distributions. It can be inferred from Fig. 6, that for arrivals greater than
approximately 20 for Poisson and greater than 40 for Normal distributions, the corresponding CDF’s yield zero probability of occurrence while the CDF of the GEV distribution yields 7.37 % of occurrence probability. Investigation of the actual data set
reveals that in 10 cases core arrivals were greater than 40, which indicates that the
observed probability is approximately 5.7 %.



Table 5 Descriptive statistics for Weekly and Biweekly core arrivals
Variable

N

Mean

SE mean

St dev.

mode

Min.

Q1

Med.

Q3

Max.

Parent sample

158

11.84

1.39

17.44

5

0

5

7

10

120

Block maxima

40

20.55

4.32

27.30

10

5

7.25

10

16

120

In the EV approach, return level plays an important role. Return level is defined as a
value that is expected to be equalled or exceeded on average once every interval of time
(T-with a probability of 1/T) [16]. Return level can be evaluated from the fitted distribution by estimating how often the extreme quantiles occur with a certain return level.
Therefore, the CDF of the GEV distribution should be obtained and then be equalled
to (1-1/T). T is called return period and the corresponding z-score is return value.
Figure 7 shows the return period vs. return level plot for valve arrivals.
The developed model was verified by Pearson’s Chi-squared Goodness of Fit test and
Pearson’s Chi-squared method [17]. The hypothesis testing was conducted by considering the null hypothesis as Fréchet distribution versus the alternative that the distribution is not Fréchet. The predicted values resulting from the Fréchet distribution,
observed data, and predicted values yielded by normal and Poisson distribution are presented in Table 7. The p-value of this test is equal to 0.2931, which is significantly
greater than any common significance levels such as 0.01, 0.05 or 0.10. Note that the
p-value is considered to be as a measure of the depth of confidence, and suggests that
this distribution conforms to GEV distribution type-II.
Like the hurricane sample case, the normal and Poisson distribution are not capable
of efficiently predicting extreme cases, particularly in the case of 40 or more arrivals
which predicts zero probability for more than 40 arrivals. However, the actual data indicates that there are 10 cases of 158 having more than 40 arrivals. The investigation of
the actual data also suggests that even though the probability of extreme arrivals is


Table 6 Estimation of distribution parameters
Parameter

Symbol

PWM

MLE

SE

95 % CI

Location

μ

5.5583

8.3540

0.7565

(6.8104,9.8976)

Scale

σ

3.2649

4.2832

0.9220

(2.7535,6.6628)

Shape

ξ

0.5814

0.8903

0.2038

(0.4762,1.3045)

Discussion
Results suggest that triage can be a critical sorting approach complementary to primary
sorting strategies. The stochastic behaviour of extreme value scenarios was investigated
in a real set of industrial data collected from remanufacturing of valves. As was expected and indicated by Fig. 6 and Table 7, models developed by GEV are more efficient at predicting stochastic behaviour of extreme core arrivals than common central
tendency approaches. The expected return and period level of huge arrivals were obtained, which are important to have sufficient predictions of these two factors for preparedness in remanufacturing systems that encounter extreme arrival disturbances.
Results from hypothesis testing for goodness of fit for the model and actual data indicate that the p-value of the test is 0.2931, which is satisfactorily greater than common
significance levels used in both industry and theory. This indicates an efficient statistical model and, from a practical perspective, a more reliable model for predicting stochastic behaviour of systems and processes. Agile and prioritized patient sorting has
been conducted in medicine, but due to common logical similarities between medical
triage and agile but perhaps less accurate core sorting in remanufacturing, medicine triage methods can be applicable to remanufacturing core sorting issues as suggested in
Table 1. Extreme core arrival modelling is not restricted to GEV models and other statistical models can be used based on necessity, availability of data and facility core processing capacity.

Page 11 of 13

Fig. 7 Return period vs. return level plot

quality, quantity and timing behaviour of the core arrivals and their prospective interactions, which may demand a multivariate statistical model. In triage scenarios in the
presented investigation, quantity is the sole factor assumed to have extremal behaviour, but it is evident that this extremal behaviour can be expanded to quality as well.
A wide spectrum of scenarios is possible; for instance along with extreme core flow,
quality of admitted cores may be considered approximately uniform, have extreme
value characteristics, or all cores may be considered remanufacturable but at different
costs [18, 19].
One prospective approach to prioritize and select a proper remanufacturing triage strategy can be as follows; (1) establish extreme value distribution models of
quantity, quality, and timing of core returns, (2) simulate remanufacturing operation performance for potential triage strategies (Fig. 8) considering market demand and managerial requirements, (3) rank the performance of triage strategies
based on single or multi-objectives (cost, revenue, time to return to normal operation, etc.) and recommend a triage strategy. It should be noted that after selection
of the most appropriate triage strategy, a virtual experimental analysis can be set
up to determine the significant factors of the process and their effects on the
process. Based on Design of Experiments (DOE) techniques, best settings of the
process factors can be achieved and even this process can be optimized by
methods such as Response Surface Method (RSM).

Table 7 Observed vs. Predicted arrivals for GEV and normal scenarios
Bin

Observed Predicted
probability
GEV

Predicted
frequency
GEV

Predicted
probability
normal

Predicted
frequency
normal

Predicted
probability
poisson

Predicted
frequency
poisson

0–25

34

0.8298

33

0.7747

31

0.99987

40

0–50

35

0.9263

37

0.9876

40

1

40

0–75

37

0.9542

38

0.9999

40

1

40

0–100 37

0.9672

39

1

40

1

40

0–125 40

0.9746

39

1

40

1

40

0–150 40

0.9794

39

1

40

1

40

0–175 40

0.9827

39

1

40


Fig. 8 Triage strategy prioritization and selection generic framework

Conclusions
Central tendency core sorting approaches may not be the sole approach to address core
sorting in remanufacturing. In extreme value core arrivals, agile and perhaps less accurate sorting strategies are suggested to balance available resource capacity. In remanufacturing business systems, the common approach for modelling of core arrivals is
primarily based on utilization of central tendency approaches such as Poisson or Normal distributions that are shown to not adequately characterize EV scenarios. Hence,
having targeted models for extreme core arrivals is critical to developing complete sorting strategies. It was shown that the EV approach is a powerful tool to evaluate such
rare but highly impactful situations and assist decision makers. A generic framework of
triage strategy prioritization and selection is also introduced.
As a contribution to remanufacturing from a practical scope, triage (modelled with
EV) can be used as a complementary sorting approach to major sorting strategies. As
mentioned, an EV approach assists decision makers to have stronger prediction abilities, especially for gatekeeping and core acquisition purposes, and this will protect
remanufacturing business from losses resulting from extreme situations and associated
consequences such as overstocking, overproduction, or losses due to sluggish response
to market pull. The major contribution of this research is the application of EV theory
to remanufacturing core sorting. EV approaches grant unique opportunities to open
scopes to future researches, such as investigation of multivariate models for EV scenarios and other triage strategies for optimization of core acquisition in EV scenarios.
Overall, results indicate that EV is a powerful tool in dealing with extreme value scenarios in remanufacturing industry and utilization of this tool as a sorting approach in
combination with other sorting strategies can enhance remanufacturing operations.
C