
INTRODUCTION

As of 2012, an American spends the average of
$8,233 a year for health care services as compared to
the OECD average of $3,268 [46]. In 2010, healthcare
expenditures in the United States (U.S.) reached

nearly $2.6 trillion a year which accounted for 17.6%
of the national GDP [23, 46]. Four years later in 2014,
U.S. health care spending increased 5.3% following
growth of 2.9% in 2013 to reach $3 trillion, or $9,523
per person. The faster growth experienced in 2014
was primarily due to the major coverage expansions
under the Affordable Care Act, particularly for
Medicaid and private health insurance [11]. The US
health care expenditures are expected to reach nearly
20% of GDP, or approximately $4.3 trillion, by 2020
[24]. In fact, health care expenditures in the U.S. are
the highest of any developed country. The country
with the next highest health care spending is
Switzerland, at 11.4% of GDP [45]. To make it
worse, health care spending in the U.S. shows no sign
of abatement as evidenced by the fact that health care
spending per person has grown faster than the nation's
economic output per person by about 1.5 percentage
points per year, on average, for the past few decades
[14]. Under current laws, U.S. federal health care
spending is on pace to exceed all discretionary
spending including defense, education and training
expenditures by 2016 [21]. Despite a growing concern
over skyrocketing health care expenditures, the U.S.
did not spend its health care capital efficiently. It was
reported that an estimated one-third of health care
expenditures in the U.S. did not improve health care
services [22]. To minimize this wasteful spending,
both the business community and the government
sector should first identify the main sources of health
care inefficiency and then sought innovative ways to
improve productivity. One of the major culprits for
health care waste includes the health care industry’s
reliance on the archaic and dysfunctional supply chain
system that contributed to redundant distribution
channels, excessive/obsolete inventory, and limited
access of essential medical supplies and
pharmaceutical products [40].
For example, according to the UPS Pain in the
Healthcare Supply Chain Survey [64], the surveyed
healthcare companies identified managing and
containing supply chain costs as their number one
concern, with 60% of the respondents reporting that
survey conducted by KPMG
Healthcare and Pharmaceuticals [34] reported that a
vast majority (97%) of the surveyed executives in the
pharmaceutical, biotech, and medical device
industries listed supply chain costs as their biggest
concern. As such, the health care supply chain is in
urgent need of a sweeping transformation that can
lead to a greater efficiency and the subsequent cost
savings in increasingly complex and regulated
environments.
Recognizing the need for such
transformation, a growing number of health-care
organizations have begun to take supply chain
initiatives as their strategic weapons. Following this
health care industry trend, the interest of academia on
health care supply chains has also begun to increase
substantially in the last decade. This growing interest
sparked a series of new lines of research dealing with
various supply chain activities that have important
managerial implications. Though the supply chain
terminology and concepts are relatively new, there
exist the extensive body of literature on health care
supply chain related topics including emergency
vehicle deployment and health care facility location
for the last several decades. With the emergence of
health care supply chain research, there are ample
opportunities for further related studies and scientific
investigations. To identify these opportunities while
avoiding the duplications of past research efforts, the
main objectives of this paper are to: (1) classify the
past literature on health care supply chain
management (HSCM) through the structured
taxonomy; (2) develop a frame of references; (3)
chronicle the evolution of the HSCM research for the
last 30 years; (4) identify the emerging trends of
HSCM research; (5) and point the direction of future
research.
2.

RESEARCH FRAMEWORK

Despite the lack of attention paid to HSCM research,
its root can be traced to the 50’s and 60’s long before
the introduction and popularity of supply chain
management principles. For instance, Morrill and
Earickson [43] developed a theoretical model that
could determine the size and location of Chicago
hospitals based on the demography, travel time, and
residence characteristics (e.g., income) of the
neighboring population. Similarly, taken from central
place theory, Schultz [54] proposed a mathematical
model which could optimize social benefits of
medical centers in the metropolitan area by increasing
their accessibility to local residents. Following suit, a
number of scholars such as Toregas et al. [62] and
Calvo and Marks [7] developed various forms of
mathematical models (including a location set
covering model launched in the 60s) that aimed to
determine the optimal size and locations of health
care facilities including emergency care facilities.
Given this rich history of the HSCM literature, it is

important for us to examine, evaluate, and integrate
prior studies related to the topic of HSCM. Without
the effort to synthesize prior HSCM research, we may
end up duplicating what has already been studied, fail
to develop a new theory built upon the previous
efforts of others, and experience difficulty in
identifying emerging research agenda that were often
overlooked in the past. This effort begins with the
retrieval of past research works on HSCM through the
on-line literature search, a summary of research
outcomes, critiques of prior research works,
identification of key research themes and popular
research streams, and integration of past research
efforts. To elaborate, we first defined HSCM in the
broadest possible sense so that we could conduct
thorough literature searches and determine how
HSCM literature was evolved from the theoretical
underpinnings of other related social science, medical
science, economics, business and engineering fields.
To demystify the HSCM terminology, we would like
to define HSCM as an incorporation of value
imperatives into every aspect of health care supply
chain activities encompassing sourcing, product
design and development, manufacturing, location,
transportation, packaging, storage, retrieval, disposal,
and follow-up health care services [40]. Herein, the
examples of value imperatives include a greater
access to health care providers (e.g., hospitals,
medical clinics, home care centers, outpatient care
facilities, nursing homes), efficient distribution of
pharmaceuticals, medical supplies, and medical
equipment, quick (or emergency) response logistics,
group purchasing for volume discounts, new product
development and promotion, product (e.g., drug)
recalls, compliance with health care regulations (e.g.,
Affordable Care Act, The Patient Safety and Quality
Improvement Act of 2005, Rule on Hospital Inpatient
Value-Based Purchasing) and standards (e.g., ISO
9000 standards, OHSA standards), product labeling
(regarding contents and side effects), safer (childresistant) packaging, and disintermediation of health
care products (e.g., shipping drugs directly from
pharmaceutical manufacturers to health care
providers). To systematically locate past research
works relevant to the above definition of HSCM, we
utilized several literature search methods specified
below.
2.1. Literature Search Media
Prior to locating past research works relevant to
HSCM, we need to choose the target populations that
will be the references of this literature review. Our
target populations are primarily articles published in
refereed scholarly journals that fit into the definition
of HSCM made earlier. Excluded are parts of the
book chapters, book reviews, dissertations/theses,
working papers, white papers, and proceeding papers
presented in the academic conferences. We also
excluded published articles that dealt with generic
health care issues but had no direct bearing on supply

articles (especially planning and scheduling of
healthcare services) can be found in Dobrzykowski et
al. [16]. In other words, our literature review
primarily focuses on the prior studies addressing
health care issues associated with the managerial
activities of sourcing, making, and delivering. To
avoid the reference biases, the primary means to find
the target publications includes a variety of reference
retrieval sources: on-line keyword searches through
Google, Google Scholar, Thomson Reuter Web of
Science, SciVerse Scopus, EBSCO Host Basic
Search, and Dow Jones Factiva; the educational
database search via the Academic Source Complete
(ASC) and Electronic Journal Center (EJC) of Ohio
Link, University Summon Library; EBSCO Business
Source Complete database; keyword searches through
the ABI/INFORM Research™ database and the
Procite© database in which the past literature has
been classified according to content- and
methodology-oriented criteria; the perusal of tables of
contents of the key academic journals (e.g., Journal of
Business Logistics, International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics Management, International
Journal of Logistics: Research and Applications,
International Journal of Logistics Management,
International Journal of Logistics Systems and
Management, Journal of Operations Management,
International Journal of Production Research,
International Journal of Production Economics,
International Journal of Operations and Production
Management, Journal of Supply Chain Management,
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal,
and Logistics Research) in the fields of supply chain
management; and tracking articles listed in the
reference sections of widely cited HSCM articles. It
should be noted that although prior studies [e.g., 9,
19, 50] examining the supply chain trends primarily
reviewed three oldest and high profile supply chain
journals such as Journal of Business Logistics,
International Journal of Physical Distribution, and
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal,
we decided to add newer but emerging supply chain
journals to capture a new schools of thoughts and
more diverse research focuses. Examples of keywords
that we used include: “health care supply chains”,
“medical supply chains”, “hospital supply chains”,
“drug/pharmaceutical supply chains”, “health care
logistics”, “health care/medical facility planning”,
“medical supply”, “emergency vehicle routing and
scheduling”, and “ambulance deployment.” Due to
the sheer size of the initial search results – For
instance, ASC alone produced more than 400 entries,
we perused the abstracts of only the published articles
to see if they contained any keywords related to
supply chain management and then screened them
one by one. To delimit the number of publications,
we excluded articles that did not incorporate health
care initiatives into any aspect of supply chain
management (i.e., sourcing, making, and delivering)

or the ones that failed to address health care issues
from a supply chain perspective. For example,
publications that discussed health care policy, health
care regulations and standards, health care service
quality, health care human resources (including
hospital staff or surgery/treatment scheduling) or
public health but had no direct ties to sourcing,
making, and delivering activities were omitted from
the list. In other words, content analysis was
performed to examine any relationships between the
concept of health care management and that of supply
chain management in the context of the published
article. Since the term ‘supply chain management’
was rarely used prior to 1980s, we primarily focused
on articles published in 1980’s and later. The
complete literature search through the multiple media
specified above yielded a total of 246 articles
considered relevant to HSCM categories as of June
15, 2016.
2.2. The Taxonomy of the HSCM Literature
To provide an organized look at the published
literature and review it in a systematic fashion, we
develop the taxonomy of the HSCM literature. This
taxonomy will help the researcher identify
hot/emerging research fields of HSCM, neglected
areas of research, and overall research trends. In terms
of the subject areas of research, this study classified
the published HSCM articles into seven areas of
applications. These seven categories are developed
by taking into account a sufficient number of
published articles (at least a total of 11 hits) in each
cluster of categories and the typical breakdown of key
supply chain activities (sourcing, making, and
delivering):
• Emergency planning which primarily deals with
the process of preparing, planning, and
coordinating an exceptional, unpredictable
medical event that exceeds the capacity of normal
resources and response time windows. Such an
event can be exemplified by medical attention
needed for a patient suffering from a sudden
heart attack, gunshot wounds, personal injuries
caused by the car/plane crash and terrorism, the
infectious disease outbreak, and the natural
disaster. Emergency planning often involves
deployment of medical staff and dispatch of
ambulances for a quick-response medical care
(e.g., paramedic care).
• Process improvement which primarily aims at
identifying an opportunity for continuous
improvement by keeping non-value adding
activities (e.g., duplicated purchases, overlapped
diagnostics tests, excessive medical equipment
and supplies, underutilized hospital beds, billing
errors, insufficient blood supplies, inadequate
public health planning) off the health-care supply
chain. The common tools used for health care
papers which investigated the bullwhip effect in
the health care supply chain may belong to this
category.
• Network design which deals with health-care
logistics issues related to transportation, storage,
and packaging of medical equipment, supplies,
and pharmaceuticals. This category also includes
papers dealing with health-care facility locationallocation problems which are concerned with the
medical service coverage of potential patient
bases in a given community (e.g., metropolitan
areas, municipalities).
• Inventory control which assures the instant
availability of needed medical supplies and
drugs/pharmaceuticals, while determining the
optimal level of inventories and/or developing
inventory investment, replenishment and
classification schemes. This application area
includes cycle counting, vendor-managed
inventory (VMI), and time-phased inventory
planning such as material requirement planning
(MRP).
• Purchasing which focuses on sourcing issues
related with health care supplier-buyer
relationship, group purchasing decisions, supplier
evaluation/selection, and supplier development
and certification.
• Information technology which configures
information infrastructure and communication
architecture needed for tracing, storing, and
analyzing data related to patient medical records
or clinical procedures and then transmitting such
data to health care supply chain partners (e.g.,
medical clinics, hospitals, pharmacies). Also,
articles that examined the use of radio frequency
identification (RFID) in a hospital setting for
patient and medical asset tracking may belong to
this category.
• Security which pays attention to corporate social
responsibility (CSR) related to health care or
drug safety. In particular, with a growing concern
over counterfeit, fake, or substandard drugs, this
category of papers are often concerned with the
secure, safe distribution of essential drugs and
medical supplies.
In terms of the research methodologies the papers are
categorized into the following areas:
• Conceptual: Those expository or tutorial studies
which discuss the strategic importance of supply
chain initiatives to health care management and
summarize emerging trends and/or existing
health care management concepts under a supply
chain context based on qualitative or descriptive
analyses. This category of research also includes
the effort to define, describe, and develop
methods for the management of health care
supply chains without using quantitative methods
[19].

•

•

•

•

3.

Case study: Those intensive studies primarily
focused on the idiosyncratic nature of a single or
several real-life examples that reflect the
relevance/irrelevance of certain theories or
prescriptions. Case studies as a research
methodology explain, explore, or describe a
phenomenon of interest. This requires a
methodologically
rigorous
and
accurate
representation of actual data and multiple sources
of evidence. Thus, the purposes, presentation of
data, and methods for gathering data may differ
among cases [17]. However, real-life contexts
under special focus of the case study are not
perfect representation of the population and thus
can be questioned for generality and consistency
[20].
Exploratory: Those employing descriptive data
analyses based on the questionnaire survey data
which intend to identify the most prevalent health
care practices and synthesize the common
opinions of practitioners regarding health care
supply chain initiatives. This type of
methodology which often relies on the summary
statistics is less concerned about theory building
or theory refinement than making observations
and inquiries about common supply chain
practices in the health care sector (see, e.g., [44]
for an application of an exploratory study to the
logistics area).
Empirical: Those based on a social science
research tradition which aims to develop,
advance, and refine theories through hypotheses
testing by employing rigorous statistical data
analyses such as a structural equation model or
other forms of confirmatory data analysis
including path analysis which helps find
cause/effect relationships among a set of
variables. This type of methodology is needed to
test theory-driven hypotheses and then build
theories in the HSCM literature (see, e.g., [53]
for a methodological foundation of an empirical
study).
Analytic: Those employing quantitative tools
such as integer programming, dynamic
programming, goal programming, non-linear
programming and other techniques such as
simulation, systems dynamic modeling or soft
systems methodologies (SSM) (see, e.g., [61]).
Generally, an analytic method refers to the
systematic way of solving health care managerial
problems (e.g., emergency vehicle dispatch,
heath care facility location and layout) using
computer technology, operations research, and
statistics.
THE ANALYSIS
LITERATURE

OF

PRIOR

HSCM

The detailed analysis of prior HSCM literature can

observed, and discovered, which areas of concern are
overlooked by past studies, how those studies are
typically conducted, and where those studies are
published. With this in mind, we summarize the
detailed analysis of the past HSCM literature
published for the last 30 years.
3.1. Key Publication Outlets
Based on this preliminary search, the academic
journals in business, medicine, and in other related
areas where HSCM issues are published were
identified. Those are listed in Table 1. Although
some specialty journals exclusively devoted to health
care issues such as Annals of Emergency Medicine,
Air Medical Journal, and Resuscitation made the topten list, many traditional supply chain journals such as
International Journal of Logistics Systems and
Management, Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, International Journal of

Services and Operations Management, and
International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management round out the top-ten list. This
fact implies that a supply chain discipline has been
embraced by health care professionals as an important
managerial tool, while health care service has
emerged as one of the hottest topics in the supply
chain field. On the other hand, there are a growing
number of specialty journals exclusively dedicated to
health care issues which cover HSCM issues as
shown in Table 1. Examples of those journals include:
International Journal of Health Care Quality;
American Journal of Health Care Quality; Journal of
Pharmacy Practices; Journal of Emergency Medicine;
American Journal of Health System Pharmacy; Health
Care Management Science; and Operations Research
for Health Care.

Table 1. A List of Popular Publication Outlets for HSCM Research
Journal Name
Number
of
HSCM
articles published
International Journal of Logistics Systems and 13
Management
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal
10
Annals of Emergency Medicine
9
International Journal of Services and Operations 9
Management
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences
8
European Journal of Operational Research
7
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics 5
Management
Air Medical Journal
5
Computers and Operations Research
5
Resuscitation
5
Annals of Operations Research
4
Computers and Chemical Engineering
4
International Journal of Health Care Quality
4
International Journal of Production Economics
4
American Journal of Medical Quality
3
Decision sciences
3
International Journal of Logistics: Research and 3
Applications
International Journal of Production Research
3
Journal of Operations Management
3
Journal of Pharmacy Practice
3
Journal of Emergency Medicine
3
Management Science
3
American Journal of Health System Pharmacy
2
AORN Journal
2
Benchmarking: An International Journal
2
Computers and Industrial Engineering
2

Popularity
Ranking
1
2
3
3
5
6
7
7
7
7
11
11
11
11
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
23
23
23
Industrial Engineering and Chemistry Research
Interfaces
International Journal of Logistics Management
International Journal of Operations and Production
Management
International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare
Marketing
International Journal of Productivity and Performance
Management
Journal of Business Logistics
Journal of Global Business Issues
Journal of Rural Health
Logistics Information Management
Journal of Public Procurement
Journal of the Operational Research Society
Omega
Operations Research for Health Care
Pre-hospital Emergency Care
Transportation Research Part E
Transportation Science
Accident: analysis and prevention
American Journal of Business
American Journal of Public Health
BMC Emergency Medicine
Business Process Management Journal
Chemical Engineering and Research Design
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics
Corporate Environmental Strategy
Decision Support Systems
Disaster Prevention and Management
Electronic Commerce Research
Emergency Medicine Journal
Emerging Infectious Disease
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Health Affairs
Health Care Management Review
Health Management Technology
Health Care Financial Management
Health Service Management Research
Health Care Management Forum
IEEE Intelligent Systems
IEEE Transactions
International Journal of Electronic Business
International Journal of Electronic Health Care
International Journal of Health Geo-graphics
International Journal of Health Planning and Management
International Journal of Information Management
International Journal of Integrated Supply Management

2
2
2
2
2
2

23
23
23
23
23
23

2

23

2

23

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46
46

International Journal of Management
1
46
International Journal of Operational Research
1
46
International Journal of Quality and Reliability 1
46
Management
International Journal of Services and Standards
1
46
Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing
1
46
Journal of Consumer Marketing
1
46
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
1
46
Journal of Health Care Marketing
1
46
Journal of Health Management
1
46
Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency 1
46
Management
Journal of Hospital Marketing and Public Relations
1
46
Journal of Public Health
1
46
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management
1
46
Journal of Service Science and Management
1
46
Journal of Supply Chain Management
1
46
Management Research Review
1
46
Mathematical and Computer Modeling
1
46
Operations Research
1
46
Production Planning and Control
1
46
Review of Business Research
1
46
Supply Chain Forum
1
46
Supply Chain Management Review
1
46
The American Journal of Medicine
1
46
The Service Industry Journal
1
46
Thunderbird International Business Review
1
46
NOTE: Journal outlets (with the only one HSCM article) listed in this table are not exhaustive

After identifying key publication outlets, we
examined which research methodologies have been
primarily used and which application areas were
most popular in those outlets. Given the diversity of
these outlets, Tables 2 and 3 only summarized
mainstream supply chain journal outlets which
published at least five HSCM articles. These
journals are International Journal of Logistics
Systems and Management, Supply Chain
Management:
An
International
Journal,
International Journal of Services and Operations
Management, and International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics Management. Table 2
shows that two most popular research methods are
case studies and analytic methods. However, it
should be noted that HSCM articles published in
both relatively new International Journal of
Logistics Systems and Management and
International Journal of Services and Operations

Management tilted toward analytic methods,
whereas well-established, highly rated Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal and
International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management rarely published HSCM
articles adopting analytic methods. This contrasting
difference may have something to do with these
journals’ editorial policies and focuses. In terms of
application areas, process improvement is the
favorite theme of the HSCM articles published in
these four supply chain journal outlets by
accounting for 54% of HSCM publications in these
journals, whereas emergency planning is the least
popular application subject. Also, notice that
network design did not receive much attention all
but International Journal of Logistics Systems and
Management. As such, academicians who would
like to publish HSCM articles should consider their
fits into one of these journals before submitting
Supply Chain
International
International
Journal of
Management:
Journal of
Journal of
Logistics
An
Services and
Physical
Research
Systems and
International
Operations
Distribution
Management
Journal
Management
and Logistics
Methods
Management

Total

Conceptual

1

3

1

0

5

Case Study

3

4

2

2

11

Analytic

6

0

4

1

11

Exploratory

1

3

0

2

6

Empirical

2

0

2

0

4

International
Journal
of
Physical
Distribution
and Logistics
Management

Total

Table 3. Application Areas in Selected Supply Chain Journal Outlets
International
Supply Chain International
Journal
of Management:
Journal
of
Logistics
Services
and
An
Application
Systems
and International
Operations
Management
Management
Journal
Areas
Emergency

0

0

1

1

2

8

4

6

2

20

3

0

0

0

3

2

4

1

0

7

0

2

1

2

5

planning
Process
improvement
Network
design
Inventory
Control
Purchasing

3.2. The Research Classification
According to the taxonomy developed earlier, the
extant literature on HSCM was categorized with

respect to its focused research
methodology as recapitulated in

Table 4. The Breakdown by the Research Area and Methodology
Conceptual Case Study
Exploratory
Empirical
Emergency
planning
Process
improvement

area and
Table 4.

Analytic

Total

22

10

18

0

29

79

19

15

6

9

14


1

2

0

0

36

39

Inventory
control

3

4

2

1

8

18

Purchasing

7

3

5

0

1

16

Information
technology
(IT)
Security

11

4

2

0

4

21

8

1

0

1

0

10

Total

71

39

33

11

92

246

In terms of the research application area,
emergency planning turns out to be the most
popular theme with a total count of 79 papers
(32%) out of 246 HSCM papers. In particular,
studies dealing with emergency responsiveness
involving paramedical assistance, ambulance
location, deployment, and dispatch became a
dominant subject in emergency planning. Built
upon earlier pioneering studies conducted by
Fitzsimmons [18] and Swoveland et al. [59], these
articles are mainly concerned with the location,
allocation and dispatch of ambulances to a medical
emergency with a quick response. A subject of the
process improvement is the second most popular
theme with a total of 63 articles (26%). A good
example of the HSCM studies focusing on process
improvement includes Colletti [13] who proposed
ways to eliminate non-value adding administrative
and material delivery processes in the hospital
supply chain through hospital-wide information
sharing. Also, as a way to reduce non-value adding
waste throughout the supply chain, Sethuraman and
Tirupati [55] came up with cures for the chronic
bullwhip effect resulting from fluctuating demand
for surgery and nursing services at the hospital and
the diagnostic laboratory. Their proposed cures
include: a development of common data bases,
alignment of incentives for data sharing, and
forging strategic alliances with medical specialists
which would improve the hospital’s and the lab’s
operating efficiency and flexibility. Similarly,
Samuel et al. [51] analyzed the bullwhip effect
inherent in the hospital supply chain using a system
dynamics simulation model and then mitigated the
bullwhip effect by improving patient application
and capacity planning processes. Recently,
Weraikat et al. [69] focused their attention to the
control of pharmaceutical waste by developing a
nonlinear mathematical model which aimed to
facilitate leftover pharmaceutical returns and

improve the sustainability for a real pharmaceutical
reverse supply chain.
In terms of the research methodology, analytic
studies representing the hard core of the traditional
operations management paradigm (e.g., location
planning, facility network design, treatment/surgery
scheduling) or that of industrial engineering (e.g.,
queuing theory, simulation) takes up the
overwhelming majority with a total count of 92
articles and the conceptual papers comprise the
second largest with a total of 71 articles. Though
perceived to be less rigorous than analytic or
empirical studies due to its expository nature,
conceptual papers seem to be almost on a par with
analytic studies. The popularity of the conceptual
papers for HSCM disciplines reflects the fact that
HSCM research is relatively young and still
evolving and thus its theoretical foundation has not
been built firmly at this point. In other words, a
conceptual piece of work is still needed as part of
preliminary studies which may help SCM
professionals understand key research issues
associated with HSCM before embarking on more
rigorous studies.
Figure 1 shows the trend in the number of
published HSCM articles by the year of publication.
Reflecting the growing strategic importance and
popularity, the number of HSCM papers has
steadily increased over the last 30 years. In
particular, we have seen a significant increase in
HSCM research for the last decade. More
specifically, we have witnessed a sudden surge in
the number of HSCM publications in 2009,
signaling the explosive growth potential of this line
of research. This trend seems to continue for the
last three years (i.e., 2010, 2011, and 2012) until it
tapered off and have been on the wane since 2013,
as the number of HSCM publications dropped to

33

30

24 24

20
15
10
5
0
-5

10
2 1 1 1 1 1

3 3 4 3

1 2 2 1 1

5

13

16

15
11
7 6

3

9

7

1984
1985
1986
1987
1989
1991
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

Papers

25

33

Year

Figure 2 shows the number of HSCM publications
by the geographical region. Although HSCM
research was represented by more than 40 different
countries and every continent across the globe,
indicating a wide-spread interest of HSCM
research, North America (especially U.S. and
Canada) dominated the HSCM research with a total
of 129 papers accounting for 52% of the HSCM
publications for the last three decades. In particular,
the U.S. alone produced a total of 116 papers.
Europe is the second largest producer of HSCM
research with a total of 46 publications. Among the
European countries, the United Kingdom (U.K.)
accounted for nearly half (46%) of these
publications. One thing to note here is that a

majority (67%) of the U.K.’s HSCM research
seems to gear toward the U.K.’s pharmaceutical
industry problems and issues stemming from
national health services (NHS) that are publicly
funded through taxation. Likewise, the African
region’s HSCM research seems to focus on the
pharmaceutical distribution and public health issues
tied to infectious disease (e.g., malaria) outbreaks
(e.g., [39, 41]). As these examples illustrate, there
may be region-specific interest in certain health
care subjects. However, with the limited number of
HSCM publications at this juncture, we did not find
any more patterns of HSCM research which
characterized
region-specific
issues.

Figure 2: The Number of Papers by the Region
129

140
120
100
80
60

46

40
20
0

No. of papers

35
9

17
6

Original Article
Figure 3 shows the number of HSCM publications
by the research methodology. Overall, an analytic
method is the most favored research methodology,
which was followed by conceptual and case study
methods. In particular, the number of analytical
papers surged from the year 2006 onward, whereas
conceptual papers tapered off after peaking in 2009.
Especially, we have witnessed a dramatic surge in
the number of analytical papers in 2010 and 2012
until the popularity of analytic research slowed
down in 2013. A growth of analytical papers in the
recent past is due in part to a continued interest in
the health care network design and emergency
planning in the aftermath of a series of high-profile
natural disasters and terrorist attacks. In contrast, a
sharp decline in the number of conceptual papers
for the last six years implies that expository papers
that simply explain why the supply chain

management concept is essential for improving
health-care services, describe how the health care
supply chain should be managed based on
anecdotal evidence, and narrate what the
fundamental HSCM issues are from a pedagogical
standpoint are no longer appealing given a plethora
of such papers for the last 30 years. Also, as the
HSCM field has established itself as the target of
more scientific inquiries, its research methodology
seems to shift toward more rigorous and widely
accepted methods such as model-building analytic
and survey-based exploratory/empirical studies.
Indeed, Figure 3 shows a continued popularity of
analytical studies relative to other research
methodologies and a gradual increase in
exploratory studies for the last six years which
substitute for a decline in conceptual studies.

Figure 3: The Number of Papers by the Methodologies

Figure 4 shows the numbers of papers by the
research areas published each year. The papers
dealing with the emergency planning issues show
the most visible growth between 2004 and 2012 in
particular. Although emergency planning has been
a classical subject of health care studies for more
than several decades, the renewed interest in
emergency planning reflects the increased public
attention paid to growing terrorist threats (e.g., 9/11
incidents, recent Paris, Brussels, and Orlando
terrorist attacks), catastrophic natural disasters (e.g.,
Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy), and infectious
disease outbreaks (e.g., West-Nile disease
resurgence, Zika virus outbreaks in Latin America,

and Valley Fever outbreaks in the U.S.) and the
subsequent needs for emergency responsiveness
including quick patient rescues and paramedic
cares. As such, unlike traditional emergency
planning problems focusing on emergency vehicle
deployment for an individual paramedic care, new
emergency planning problems dealing with the risk
of terrorism, natural disasters, and infectious
disease outbreaks affecting a wider region and a
greater population base required a new set of
models and algorithms along with new problem
definitions. These problems have emerged as a
popular subject of HSCM research. For example,
smallpox attack. Craft et al. [15] developed a series
of mathematical models including a dose-response
model to respond to bioterror anthrax attacks. More
recently, Tang and Lau [60] discussed emergency
logistics responses to potential avian influenza
outbreaks in Hong Kong. Coping with more
frequent natural disasters, Jotsi et al. [27] developed
a simulation model for the dispatch and routing of
emergency vehicles in a post-disaster environment.
Lin et al. [37] also presented a multiple objective
integer programming model and heuristics for
solving the problem of delivering prioritized items
in disaster relief operations.
In addition, process improvement seemed to bring
more attention to HSCM researchers in 2009 and
afterward. This upward pattern reflects the health
care organization’s increased efforts to control
mounting health care costs by reducing waste or
any other non-value adding activities throughout
the health care supply chain. For example, in an
effort to provide patient-centric health care
services, Villa et al. [66] analyzed the movement of
patients through different sets of process sequences
(so-called “patient flow logistics”) comprised of
outpatient
clinics,
emergency
departments,
operating rooms, wards, intensive care units, and
post-acute care settings and then re-designed these
process sequences in such a way that scarce health
care resources were better utilized and collaboration
efforts among different units were maximized.
Similarly, Lillrank et al. [36] broke down the health
care supply chain involving patient diagnosis and
organ transplantation into a series of connected
processes and then developed standardized process
routines that could smooth the flow of critical
patient information throughout the supply chain.
With the goal of reducing costs and facilitating
information flows across the hospital supply chain,
Su et al. [57] analyzed the four stages of logistics
innovation processes: (1) setting interactive
environments among the internal health care units;
(2) collecting logistics process data; (3) developing
a feedback loop to identify improvement processes;
(4)
creating
inter-organizational
learning
environments among the hospital supply chain
partners. Based on these analyses, they initiated
new logistics innovation processes which made the
hospital supply chain leaner than before and
improved relationships with hospital suppliers and
internal units.
On the other hand, after peaking in 2009, the
HSCM research dealing with inventory control
issues has begun to decline for the last several

years. The HSCM studies focusing on inventory
control were often concerned with the management
of pharmaceutical inventories crucial for timely
patient treatments (e.g., [3, 4, 29, 47, 49, 65]). This
type of research might have lost its steam in the
recent past due in part to the increased adaptation of
just-in-time (JIT) principles to the pharmaceutical
and hospital industries [30]. Also, the emergence
and advancement of radio frequency identification
(RFID) technology for pharmaceutical and hospital
industries might have contributed to more efficient
tracking and control of inventories and thus
decreased the need for traditional inventory control
and planning techniques such as the variations of
the economic order quantity (EOQ) model [5, 6, 8,
33, 48]. Reflecting the growing popularity of RFID
in the health care industry, 13 (62%) out of 21
HSCM papers dealing with IT-related themes
focused on the role of RFID in HSCM. For
instance, Wang et al. [68] investigated the potential
merits of RFID (e.g., cost savings, improved patient
safety and medical services, greater supply chain
visibility) for the Taiwanese hospital. Later, Tzeng
et al. [63] evaluated the business value (e.g.,
effective communication, asset utilization, patient
safety, supply chain integration) of RFID for the
hospital supply chain. Kumar et al. [33] examined
how RFID could improve the decision making
process and subsequently enhance the efficiency of
health-care supply chains. Likewise, Carr et al. [8]
investigated the health care organization’s intention
to adopt RFID to improve its supply chain
efficiency and then identified various factors (e.g.,
perceived adoption risk, technical compatibility,
perceived usefulness, organizational resistance,
RFID training support, ease of use) influencing the
RFID adoption decision. Predicated on laboratory
experiments, Swartz et al. [58] verified the merits
of RFID for monitoring patient cares (patient
conditions) and ordering medical supplies in the
medical supply chain. Despite the huge benefit
potentials of IT (including RFID) for a supply chain
setting as noted by Auramo et al. [2], Min and Shin
[42], and Jones et al. [26], however, it is somewhat
surprising to find that the IT theme so far has not
drawn much interest among scholars studying
HSCM [67,71]. The IT themes gradually gaining
traction in HSCM research include: an examination
of the role of information and communication
technology in enhancing cooperation among health
care supply chain partners (e.g., [38]); development
of the enterprise-wide decision support system
(DSS) for a health care supply chain (e.g., [35, 40]);
use of RFID for a counterfeit-resistant
4.

A SUMMARY OF THE RESEARCH
FINDINGS, TRENDS, AND FUTURE
RESEARCH IMPLICATIONS

Based on our analysis of the past HSCM literature,
the following points are noteworthy:
1)
As evidenced by the number and diversity of
journal outlets which published at least one HSCM
paper, the HSCM field is viewed as the multidisciplinary research domain. In fact, more than 90
different journals have published HSCM papers.
These journals represent diverse fields of study
including emergency medicine, pharmacy, public
administration, public health, chemical engineering,
operations research, industrial engineering, health
care marketing, global/international business,
service operations, electronic business, and general
management, not to mention supply chain
management. Although the main stream supply
chain oriented journals (e.g., International Journal
of Logistics Systems and Management, Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal,
International Journal of Services and Operations
Management, International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics Management) still play a
prominent role as a viable forum or as a popular
publication outlet for the HSCM research, specialty
journals (e.g., Annals of Emergency Medicine, Air
Medical Journal, Resuscitation) exclusively
dedicated to health care/medical issues have
become the frequent publication outlets for the
HSCM research. Also, it is noted that a journal
covering public sector decision issues (i.e., SocioEconomic Planning Sciences) often publish HSCM
papers (especially papers dealing with emergency

planning and health care facility location issues).
On the other hand, four main stream SCM journals
mentioned above rarely published HSCM articles
dealing with emergency planning. This finding
indicates that main stream SCM journals seem to
shy away from the subject that has been heavily
covered by the specialty journals. Thus, in selecting
the proper publication outlet, academicians should
be aware of the fact that a certain journal tends to
have its own specific focus or preference for a
particular subject or research theme.
2)
In contrast with the Sachan and Datta [50]’s
finding that direct observation research methods
such as case studies were less popular for
conducting generic (or non-HSCM) supply chain
research in mainstream supply chain journal outlets,
case study methods turned out to be more popular
among the HSCM research published in four main
stream SCM journals. On the other hand, it is
intriguing to note that, in congruent with the pattern
of generic SCM research, empirical research
methods based on hypothesis testing are minimal in
the HSCM research.
3)
The HSCM research activities dealing with
IT, purchasing, and security in the health care
sector are scant relative to those studies focusing on
emergency planning, process improvement, and
network design. This pattern reflects the fact that
studies dealing with emergency planning have a
long history of research streams dating back to
1960s and thus established clear research agenda
and well-defined problems to solve. On the other
hand, HSCM studies addressing IT, purchasing, and
security issues are still in infancy and thus are
conceptual and descriptive, illustrating a lack of
confirmed theory. The dearth of this line of
research presents ample research opportunities. For
instance, future research efforts should be directed
toward the impact analyses of IT (e.g., enterprise
resource planning, web technology, RFID) as well
as sourcing practices (e.g., medical supply sourcing,
pharmaceutical supplier selection, health care
outsourcing, and group purchasing through health
care alliances) which encouraged many tiers of
suppliers to comply with a set of new health care
regulations and rules. In addition, given the
increasing incidences of tainted or counterfeit
drugs, research tackling drug safety or bio-terrorism
problems is greatly needed.
4)
Despite the unique inventory situation in the
health care industry where hospitals and pharmacies
have to deal with more challenging inventory
problems associated with many perishable
pharmaceutical items and medical supplies with a
short shelf life, the HSCM studies that are mainly
concerned with inventory control and planning
issues are sparse and dwindling (a total of only nine
published articles for the last three decades).
5)
Emergency planning still remains as the
dominant subject of research interest for many
scholars as evidenced by the prevalence and
longevity of HSCM papers concerning emergency
planning (one third of total HSCM publications; at
least one article per year over the last 30 years and
35 articles between 2005 and 2012).
The
popularity of this particular subject led to the birth
of some specialty journals (e.g., Annals of
Emergency Medicine, BMC Emergency Medicine,
Journal of Emergency Medicine, and Air Medical
Journal) almost exclusively dedicated to emergency
medical care and emergency vehicle deployment. It
is also noted that a subject of emergency planning
was approached by diverse research methodologies
(see Table 4). However, the analysis of the past
HSCM literature on emergency planning reveals the
absence of an empirical study.
From a
methodological standpoint, another intriguing
pattern that we found is a gradual transformation of
popular research tools. For instance, an analytic
method was most popular for the HSCM papers on
emergency planning during the 80’s, whereas the
popularity of conceptual papers gained steam
during the 90’s and then exploratory studies have
been increasingly used for the last decade (early
21st century). A change in the popularity of
research methodology may have reflected a gradual
change in the popular research theme (from
emergency vehicle deployment to quick disaster
response).
6)
It is apparent that both the analytic method
and the conceptual study are still the most popular
research methodology for HSCM (66% of the total

HSCM publications) due in part to the growing
difficulty in collecting empirical or secondary data.
In particular, the prevalent use of an analytic
method has something to do with the nature of
specific applications such as network design (e.g.,
health care facility location) and emergency vehicle
deployment for emergency planning. For example,
there exist well-defined, structured mathematical
problems (i.e., a p-median problem for health care
facility location; a set covering problem for
emergency vehicle deployment) for these
applications. Thus, it is easier for the model builder
to develop systematic decision-aid tools such as
mathematical models and solution algorithms. This
rationale explains why 36 (92%) out of 39 network
design HSCM papers are analytical. However, as
health care issues cut across different functional
areas of the supply chain and encompasses the
different level of decision-making hierarchy (from
operational to strategic), there is a growing need for
a more fluid, open research methodology such as
soft operations research (O.R.) tools that can
effectively deal with ill-defined, less structured
health care supply chain issues facing practicing
managers and policy makers. In addition, there is a
growing need for the use of hybrid research
methodologies (e.g., a mixture of both the case
study and the analytic method) which combine the
merits of different research tools and address
interdependent health care supply chain issues (e.g.,
the impact of IT implementation on process
improvement, the use of IT for increased drug
safety) encompassing the entire spectrum (from the
upstream to downstream) of supply chain issues.
7)
The empirical methodology, despite being
recognized as a hallmark of rigorous supply chain
research, constitutes a mere 4.4 percent (eleven out
of 246 papers). This indicates that much of the
HSCM research methodologies are largely
expository, exploratory, analytic, and descriptive in
their approaches. In particular, it should be noted
that the use of the empirical research methodology
for emergency planning, inventory control,
purchasing, and security is nearly non-existent.
Although a lack of empirical studies indicates the
youth of HSCM research without much of the
developed or confirmed theory, additional empirical
research is in great need to establish HSCM as the
serious research field. For example, empirical
studies investigating the impact of the Obama Care
on health care supply chains and/or the financial
performance or the competitiveness of the firm
complying with the Affordable Care Act may be
worth pursuing.
8)
For the last several years, there is a rapid
increase of HSCM papers (especially between 2009
and early 2013) which attempted to address public
health issues related to infectious diseases (e.g.,
avian influenza, malaria) and public drug
increase the accessibility of essential anti-malarial
drugs for controlling Malaria outbreaks in SubSaharan countries by developing a drug supply
chain map. More recently, Arifoglu et al. [1], Chick
et al. [12], and Hessel [25] initiated SCM research
dealing with the vaccination plan for preventing the
influenza pandemic.
9)
Based on aforementioned analyses and
findings, various research gaps are identified as
shown in the study positioning map of Figure 5.
Examples of the noticeable research gaps include:

3
(a) a lack of HSCM studies which facilitate medical
information sharing across the all kinds of healthcare organizations (e.g., primary care, urgent care,
first respondent treatment facilities, and special care
medical clinics) at the different phases of supply
chain activities; (b) a growing need for developing
a disaster response plan model which improves the
coordination and synchronization of various
inventory planning and quick response logistics
activities involving the deliveries of needed medical
supplies, pharmaceuticals, and food items to the
disaster
hit
areas.

Figure 5. The Positioning Map of the HSCM Studies

5.

CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

Over the last century, the human life expectancy
has continued to climb thanks to a series of medical
breakthroughs and improved living conditions. For
example, the today’s American life expectancy has
increased to nearly 80 years from 47 years at the
turn of the last century [70]. To enjoy the sustained
acceleration of human life expectancy and high
quality of living, a greater access to high quality
health care is imperative. Unfortunately, there is a
growing concern over such access due to fast rising
health care costs and further strained health care
resources. Without finding systematic ways to
control health care costs and utilize limited health
care resources, the quality of our lives will
deteriorate rapidly and may reach the point of no

return. One of such ways includes leveraging
supply chain management (SCM) principles for the
continuous improvement of health care services.
The field of studies which focus on the SCM
disciples of health care is dubbed HSCM. For the
last ten years, we have seen a wealth of articles
addressing HSCM related issues. In an effort to
gain valuable insights into the evolution of HSCM
research and grow this line of research further, this
paper describes the past development and current
status of HSCM research, synthesizes the focused
areas of HSCM research, and captures the emerging
perspectives of HSCM research. As the HSCM
research is beginning to take off as a subfield of
main-stream supply chain studies, we should not
lose sight of major drivers of HSCM: the
incorporation of lean and agile principles into
activities. Thus, the continued investigation of these
drivers is worth pursuing as the future research
agenda, since it would help the HSCM research
field mature and refresh. In particular, we would
like to suggest the following lines of research for
the subjects of further scientific investigation.
• According to the Congressional Budget Office
[14], prices of prescription drugs are
approximately 35% to 55% higher in the U.S.
than they are in other countries. For example,
prices for the 30 most-commonly prescribed
drugs are one-third higher in the U.S. than in
Canada and Germany, and more than double
the prices in Australia, France, Netherlands,
New Zealand, and the U.K. [56]. Likewise,
pharmaceutical prices vary considerably from
one country to another. Considering this price
variation, there is a need to study the impact of
grey drug market diversion on drug distribution
channels (e.g., direct-to-end user vs. direct-towholesaler) and subsequent drug pricing.
• Medical supplies are the second largest
expense to hospitals after labor in providing
patient care [31]. As such, studies developing
more cost-efficient inventory planning or JIT
delivery strategies of medical supplies are
worth pursuing. Also, with a growing prospect
of disintermediation, distributing medical
supplies directly from medical supply
producers to hospitals, studies examining how
significantly disintermediation improves health
care supply chain efficiency and subsequently
saves health care expenses may be in great
need.
• As pharmaceuticals and medical supplies move
through the complex array of health care
supply chains, some of them can be
contaminated,
damaged,
mishandled,
mislabeled, and misplaced while going through
numerous supply chain players. To ensure the
supply chain integrity, a growing number of
hospitals explore the use of new technology,
such as radio frequency identification (RFID),
to keep track of those items throughout the
health care supply chain [8]. The growing
adaptation of such technological advance often
requires changes in supply chain planning (e.g.,
demand planning, inventory planning, and
distribution planning) and subsequently
necessitates new management imperatives.
With that in mind, for example, further studies
investigating how RFID implementation can
facilitate collaboration, information sharing,
and data transfer among the health care supply
chain constituents may be needed.
• In an effort to push health care to less
expensive settings, today’s health care systems
tend to drive health care services from the

•

•

•

traditional health care institution such as
hospitals to the community. This trend means
the greater prevalence of outpatient care than
ever before. Since outpatient procedures are
being performed in offsite medical clinics,
while more patient care is being shifted to the
home, the conventional model that was
designed to locate hospitals and medical clinics
as a single-echelon health care facility no
longer makes sense. Thus, a new network
design model that reflects the aforementioned
shift in health care needs to be developed.
Going one step further, the network design
model that can help create health care or
medical intelligence within the business
analytics framework will be needed in the
future.
With the fast rising health care cost in the
fragmented health care industry, a growing
number of hospitals have tried to take
advantage of a group purchasing organization
(GPO) such as Novation, Amerinet, Premier,
and HealthTrust Purchasing Group which can
pool the purchasing volume of its members for
various medical equipment, supplies and
services and develop more favorable
purchasing terms (e.g., lower price through the
volume discount). However, with hundreds of
health care GPOs to choose from, its selection
and joining its membership can be a daunting
task. Thus, more systematic decision-aid tools
are needed to choose the most appropriate GPO
and then maximize its membership benefits,
while avoiding any overpayments to the
selected GPO.
As the world gets closer with improved
transportation means, infectious diseases can
spread out more quickly and widely all across
the world [40]. Especially, developing
countries with a rapid population growth but
limited medical resources are highly
susceptible to deadly disease outbreaks.
Although some ground works have been
established by a few pioneering researchers,
more research from a supply chain angle is
needed to tackle public health care issues
associated with infectious disease outbreaks
including avian influenza which is still rampant
in Far-Eastern Asian countries. The example
of such research includes the development of a
pharmaceutical supply chain that can increase
the access and affordability of essential drugs
and vaccinations.
Considering the controversies surrounding
some of the landmark healthcare laws such as
the Affordable Care Act in the U.S., HSCM
studies assessing the impact of such laws or
policies on the health care supply chain would
be another fruitful area of future HSCM

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

research pattern of SCM areas (including
HSCM research field) which seldom utilized
the secondary data sources, the use of
secondary data sources would be rewarding for
studying the HSCM impact of governmentinduced health care laws, regulations, and
policies.
Given the limited research tackling interorganizational issues in the supply chain
network, HSCM research investigating the
inter-dynamics or organizational learning
among healthcare supply chain partners such as
healthcare insurance companies, healthcare
logistics providers, and healthcare service
providers would be in great need.