

Introduction
A supply chain in its traditional form (forward supply chain), is a mixture of processes to fulfill

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

cellphone reverse logistics (RL). RL is referred to all recovery activities related to a service or a
product after the transaction. The final aim is to optimize the efficiency of the aftermarket
elements [36]. Rogers and Tibben-Lembke [37] explained RL as the procedure related to
planning and controlling the flows of materials, inventory, final products, and related information efficiently starting from consuming and then going to the sources for cost saving or
achieving sustainability. Managing the returned products plays important role in supply chains
because of both economic and environmental effects. Some literature papers have been
published about this topic (e.g. [1, 2, 13, 17]).

E-waste and cellphone
E-waste is related to every waste that comes from or affected by electronic devices. E-waste is
a prominent challenge in modern communities [28]. It includes some materials (e.g., Mercury,
Lead, Arsenic) that can be harmful for wildlife and/or humans. E-waste is an important
problem regarding computers and wireless technologies due to the challenges in discarding
those products. Just 2% of America’s trashes in landfills are related to E-waste. However, Ewaste causes 70% of the total toxic wastes [40]. It is increasing four times faster than the other
types of wastes, but just 12.5% of it is recovered [42]. The tools related to information and
communication technology (ICT) (e.g., personal computers, cellphones, and printers)
accounted for 7% of E-waste in 2014 [5, 18].
There are some truths on the flip side of the mentioned facts. The majority of the
components of a cellphone can be recycled. More specifically, 15% of Glasses and Ceramics,
40% of Plastics, and 15% of Coppers are recyclable [31]. Based on U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency [43], for each 1 million cellphones that are recycled, 772 lbs. of Silver,
35,274 lbs. of Copper, 33 lbs. of Palladium, and 75 lbs. of Gold are recyclable. The most of
what is called “E-waste” is really not waste. They are entire electronic parts or devices that
have the potential to be reused or recycled because of their materials.
Increasing trend in demands of E-waste recycling, and associated recovery options provide
economic opportunities such as creating careers and developing businesses. Focusing on
Canada, E-waste recyclers and organizations are active in most of the provinces. Ontario
was the home of four main companies in E-waste and recycling fields in 2000. In 2004, there
were fourteen major companies in these fields in Ontario. The increasing trend shows the
importance of reverse logistic management. We focus on RL of cellphones in this paper
particularly in the three provinces of Canada.

Research contributions and methods
To our knowledge, there are very few research investigations related to RL of cellphones
particularly in Canada. Considering the geographical locations in the map of Canada, Nova
Scotia (in Eastern Canada), Ontario (in Mid Canada), and British Columbia (in Western
Canada) are good representatives for RL of cellphones in the country. As a result, we focus
on these three provinces in this research. We observed that there are not sufficient scientific
investigations in the literature concentrating RL of cellphones in Ontario, British Colombia,
and Nova Scotia. It is noticeable that there are several unexplored areas in RL of cellphones

183

questions: Which parts of cellphones can be recovered? What are the characteristics of
cellphone RLs in Canada? What are the issues in this subject? What are the effects of
cannibalization of cellphone RLs? To answer these questions, we examine the main recovery
choices (i.e., reusing, repairing, remanufacturing, and recycling) related to cellphones. We
discuss the pricing concerns of the remanufactured and returned cellphones in a novel system.
In addition, current Canadian federal and provincial policies related to recycling cellphones are
discussed. The method of finding characteristics of reverse logistics is based on the current
cellphones recovery practices. In addition, other papers in the literature and reliable sources are
utilized in this research. We also analyze short case studies based on the methods provided by
Voss et al. [45].
In “Literature review” section, we provide a literature review related to RL of cellphones. In
“Cellphone” section, the recoverable components of cellphones are discussed. “Reverse supply
chain networks of cellphones in Canada” section provides some information about End of Life
(EoL) practices of cellphones in Canada, and statistics on cellphone return in Canada (as
subsections). In “National and provincial programs of Cellphone reverse logistics” section, we
examine how the RL process is managed in the three provinces. “Case studies” section
consists of two case studies related to RL of cellphones. In “Effects of cannibalization”
section, the effects of cannibalization on RL of cellphones are discussed. Finally, conclusions
and recommendations are provided in “Conclusions” section.

Literature review
Research about cellphones emerged almost 19 years ago when the products were targeted
by European policy makers [9]. Five major enterprises including Ericsson, Alcatel,
Motorola, Panasonic, and Nokia formed ECTEL Environmental Task Group. They conducted a pilot project in six months to find useful information about the returning
processes of small electronics. They aimed to implement a mobile phone collection,
redistribution, and finally recycling infrastructure. In addition, they wanted to encourage
all parties (e.g., retailers, waste authorities, distributors, and recyclers) to participate in the
return chain.
There were some publications that were produced by ECTEL. Useful information such as
recommendations for management of end-of-life cellphones [10], and life-cycle energy management for recycling and returning cellphones [30] were provided in those papers. In a study
that was conducted by Geyer et al. [16], an optimal end-of-life (EoL) management decision
was recommended for cellphones sold in U.S., considering the law and the trends in international design that affect economy and environment. In that project, three end-of-life management choices were considered including reusing the cellphones, reusing the parts, and
recycling the materials. The authors showed the importance of having a minimum reuse rate
to obtain a good economic growth. They concluded that each policy should be assessed based
on both economic and environmental impacts on the society. Geyer and Doctori Blass [15]
investigated the business impacts of reusing and recycling cellphones according to the data
gathered in 2003 in U.K., and in 2006 in U.S. They illustrated that although reusing cellphones
has a positive effect on the profit, there is no guarantee to have more profit through recycling

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

the problems in the system are low recovery amount via the official networks, large
growing secondary markets due to the potential values of the cellphones, and uneven
logistics and supply chain systems for the returned cellphones. Moreira de Moraesa et al.
[32] evaluated two RL scenarios related to cellphones utilizing life-cycle assessment
(LCA) method. The first scenario was a recycling one in Brazil where only the batteries
were recycling. The other components of the cellphones were outsourcing to Europe. On
the other hand, the total recovery activities were in Brazil in the second scenario. The
authors indicated that the second scenario had a lower possible negative effects because
of the reducing Photochemical Oxidation, Acidification, Eutrophication, and utilizing
clean energies and technologies. Besides, the second scenario could produce socioeconomic benefits via selling the recovered materials, and generating occupations and
incomes. Pandian [33] evaluated the performance of an RL company via an agentbased system. They took into account the main elements in the RL as agents that can
act independently. Some agents included collector, sorting, remanufacturing, recycler,
distributor, and supplier agents. They measured the individual performances of each
agent. Furthermore, they provided some recommendations to advance the performances
of the agents.
Some papers have been published related to recycling the cellphones. Huisman [21] applied
an environmental evaluation method for recycling the cellphones. Guide et al. [20] provided
some information about a remanufacturing cellphone company in U.S. Franke et al. [14]
provided a hybrid solution approach for remanufacturing mobile phones by combining
discrete-event simulation and optimization methods. Guide and Van Wassenhove [19]
analyzed different types of returns such as end-of-use return in markets. Dedrick et al.
[11] developed a new method for analyzing three types of phones. Some practical
information related to cellphone industry have been provided in their paper. Jayant
et al. [24] applied a hybrid decision-making method including AHP and TOPSIS to
select the best cellphone service provider in a reverse supply chain case. Sarath et al. [38]
published a comprehensive paper about waste management of cellphone and related
issues. They provided a useful review focusing on management of mobile phone waste,
consumer behavior, economic aspect of cell phone recovery, and recovery options for
different materials of cellphone. They mentioned in the conclusions that more research
papers should be published about this topic. Velmurugan [44] reviewed and analyzed
health and environmental effects of remanufacturing cellphones. Argenta et al. [4]
discussed recycling the components of cellphones (e.g., LCD screens). John et al. [25]
investigated a reverse logistics network for mobile phones and digital cameras.
The mentioned journal papers and articles have emphasized the environmental effects
of recycling cellphones, and the associated recovery choices such as reusing and
remanufacturing. However, they have overlooked how the speed of technological improvement is affecting cellphone RL, and the role of the fast growing secondary market
in the RL management. Furthermore, we observed that the investigations performed and
the papers published or available, mostly include the time from the beginning of
cellphone recycling when the E-Waste topic started being addressed, and miss out on
the quick technological development of cellphone in the most recent years. Besides, the
majority of the peer-reviewed journal publications in this field have provided theoretical

185

Cellphone
Cellphones can be categorized to feature phones and smart phones. Feature phones provide
basic functionality of a cellphone. Other than calling and receiving calls, these basic functions
may include internet access, camera, music player, etc. They are usually low priced and
somewhere in between the basic cellphone, and cellphone with advanced functionality like
integrated apps and multitasking features. On the other hand, smart phones are cellphones
with advanced computing capabilities that run on Mobile Operating Systems (OS). The OS
(e.g., IOS by Apple, Android by Google) offer advanced Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs) to permit other applications (popularly known as ‘App’) to run on cellphones. These
applications have better integration with the phone’s OS and hardware, than the general feature
phones [39]. Smart phones typically have bigger screens with touch screen options.

The recoverable components of cellphones
About 10 to 12 key physical parts exist in a standard cellphone. Some parts such as
display, camera, battery, and charger can be remanufactured. These components can be
disassembled easily, and can be utilized in manufacturing cellphones for the primary or
the secondary markets [12]. 500 to 1000 components exist in a standard cellphone. They
are made of diverse substances and materials [26]. More than 30 metals have been
utilized in a cellphone such as Silver, Gold, and exceptional earth metals. The potential
recycling rate is 50% in half of them. Among 20% to 35% of the materials of a cellphone
are missing when the cellphone is shredded and melted down in the recycling process.

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

Characteristics of cellphone from RL perspective
Cellphones have some characteristics that are important from RL viewpoint. Light weight is one of
them. The weights of cellphones mostly are around 110 to 185 g. Short life span is the other
characteristic. They are usually around 18 to 24 months. The demands for new cellphones
compounded by fast changing technology permit the producers to bring newer products that lead
to quicker refurbishing and recycling requirements. The other feature is occupying a limited space.
It is noticeable that an individual may have some cellphones at the same time, dissimilar to the
bigger products such as refrigerators. Ease of shipment is the other attribute of cellphones. As a
result, it is convenient to sell them in a local secondary market via online channels such as Kijiji,
eBay, and Craigslist. Another fact about cellphone is that the owners often do not throw them away.
In addition, cellphones have better resell and recycling values than the other types of E-waste. The
other feature is that the third-party companies manage collecting the cellphones to gain profit.

Recovery options of cellphones
The general recovery choices for a returned product are repairing, reusing, reconditioning,
remanufacturing, recycling, and parts harvesting [22]. These six options are called 5R1P.
Repairing: Repair is defined as replacing or fixing a specific faulty component. The rest
of the product requires minimum changes.
Reusing: If a retuned cellphone has working conditions, it can be reused. In some cases, it
may require simple repackaging and cleaning. This type of return may consist of the
products that are returned within the valid return period, or the products that are sold via
websites such as Kijiji.
Reconditioning: In some cases, a product may require some cleaning or surface
polishing. These processes usually are done on the surfaces.
Remanufacturing: A definition of remanufacturing is a collection of the processes to
restore a discarded and non-functional product to have a product similar to a new one
[29]. Remanufacturing of cellphone is the process of giving it a new life after EoL. It is
the most significant recovery choice in terms of process and time.
Recycling: It includes the process of material restoration by different methods such as
melting the material (e.g., glass and plastic), and producing new products. Cellphones can
be recycled and produce some materials.

Issues and research gaps with recovery of cellphones
We can divide recovery of cellphones into collection of cellphones, and recovery of cellphones
from the returned devices. In this section, we review some topics associated with the recovery
of cellphones.

Lack of awareness about cellphone recycling

187

Lack of efficiency of RL
Efficient and effective RL processes for cellphones are vital to recover greater number of
cellphones which are going into the landfill or being kept at home.

Cost
It is hard to compensate the costs of collection, testing, inspection, refurbishment, and
redistribution with the profit obtained from selling the recycled materials or remanufactured
products. The low returning cost compared to the residual values of cellphones encourages the
consumers to return the used cellphones.

Lack of incentive
In most cases, there is not sufficient incentive for the consumers to return the
cellphones. In several situations, the incentive offered is so minor that they do not feel
the urge to return or recycle their cellphones. Greater monetary value for cellphone
returning, and more education about the significance of recycling can change the
mindset of consumers.

Price of resalable cellphones
There is no standard price for selling used cellphones. As a result, consumers often
are confused about buying or selling used cellphones. For instance, an old cellphone
without touchscreen features may have zero resale value, but an iPhone 5 may have
significant values.

Role of technology
Technology plays an important role in determining the residual values of cellphones.
Cellphones are become outdated quickly because of the fast technological progresses. Consequently, cellphones lose their demands as well as the prices rapidly.

Role of contracts with carriers
The contracts offered by the carriers are important factors. Carriers often encourage trade in
and recycling programs. They usually offer hardware upgrades which permit the current
customers to have newer cellphones without any upfront cost. These choices have two
implications. The older cellphones become obsolete, many times well before the end of their
useful life. In addition, being locked to the carriers’ networks, they are simply stored or kept
away without being utilized in most cases.

Brand of cellphone

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

Reverse supply chain networks of cellphones in Canada
The players contribute in forward and reverse supply chains of cellphones can be categorized
as follows: a) Users: Users are the buyers or consumers that utilize cellphones. In RL, the
flows of cellphones begin from users. b) Carriers: They distribute cellphones. Carriers are the
wireless service providers that provide connection between cellphones and wireless networks.
In several situations, they own the network. c) Manufacturers: They design and produce
cellphones.

EoL practices of cellphones in Canada
Currently, the used cellphones are being disposed in four different ways including keep, reuse,
recycle, and garbage (landfill). Figure 2 shows the flows of RL cellphones in Canada. We
describe the details in the subsections.

Keep (Store)
In this subcategory, the users either just store cellphones away, or they still use them for diverse
purposes.

Reuse
Reuse occurs when a cellphone is repurposed, or reused, or resold. Cellphones can be used for
calling emergency services (e.g. 911). Elderly persons or victims of domestic violence may

189

portion of cellphones are resold in secondary markets such as eBay and Kijiji. Some consumers prefer to donate them to charity where they are further reused. Some cellphones are
gifted to friends or family for reusing. Several cellphones that are stolen or lost are reused.

Recycle
The popularity of recycling cellphones has increasing trend. Some recycling programs are
available such as a) Take-back or trade-in programs (e.g. Bell, Best Buy, Apple). b) Recycling
programs (e.g. recycle my cell). c) Other techniques and methods for collection (e.g. recycling
for profit businesses like Orchard.ca). The collected cellphones via these programs are
managed in three main ways: 1) Refurbish: The cellphones collected are reconditioned, tested
for defect and functionality, and sold to consumers. 2) Dismantle and parts recycled:
Cellphones are dismantled, and parts are reused. 3) Smelter: Cellphones are disassembled
and sold for components, or passed on to a smelter (material reconstruction). Some materials
such as Gold, Copper, Platinum, Silver, Iron, Nickel, and Zinc can be obtained. In one metric
ton of old cellphones without batteries (about 8800 cellphones), there are approximately 7
pounds of Silver, 308 pounds of Copper, and half pound of Gold [35].

E-Waste
The numbers of cellphones going to landfills have dropped significantly in recent years.
Availability of recovery options and government regulations are the main reasons.

Statistics on cellphone return in Canada
There is not very precise available data about cellphone returns in Canada. Table 1 shows the
cellphone return data in Canada and the three provinces.

National and provincial programs of Cellphone reverse logistics
We focus on three provinces that are geographically appropriate for representing Canada. The
provinces include British Columbia in the west, Nova Scotia in the east, and Ontario in the
middle as representatives of the whole country. For two of these three provinces, Recycle My
Cell handles all types of cellphone recycling programs. For some provinces like Ontario, there
are some profit and non-profit organizations that are involved in the cellphones recycling.

Provincial policies and procedures
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) is a national initiative that targets different types of
cellphones and electronics. Recycle My Cell is a free national recycling program that has been
focused on cellphones in this initiative. This program is mandatory in Prince Edward Island,
18
17
20

5E
F
F
F

Put them
in the garbage
25
34 E
26
19

Took or sent them to a
depot or drop-off centre
19
30 E
18
17 E

Returned them to
a supplier or retailer

Had dead or unwanted cellular phones to dispose of (%)

F: Too unreliable to be published, E: Use with caution

Canada
Nova Scotia
Ontario
British Columbia

Had dead or unwanted cellular
phones to dispose of

8
F
10
15 E

Donated or gave
them away

Table 1 Disposal of E-waste adopted from Statistics Canada, URL: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-526-x/2013001/t018-eng.htm

F
F
F
F

Repaired or
sold them

44
25 E
41
46

Still had
them

2E
F
F
F

Other

191

labels. Recycle My Cell has received approval from Nova Scotia in 2008, and British
Columbia in 2009. In addition, it has been officially recognized as the approved cellphone
stewardship program in Manitoba, Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and
Labrador, Saskatchewan in 2009, and Alberta in 2011. In the other provinces of Canada, it
operates on a voluntary basis [23].

Cellphone recycling in Ontario
Ontario Electronic Stewardship (OES) manages the recycling of cellphones in Ontario via four
channels including OES service providers, collection events, retailers, and municipals. Furthermore, there is an opportunity for participation in Recycle My Cell which is a national
cellphone recycling program in Canada. Some carriers such as Fido, Bell, Rogers, and some
manufacturers such as Sony, Blackberry, and Samsung have participating programs with
Recycle My Cell. Figure 3 displays an overview of cellphone recovery in Canada. Currently,
Recycle My Cell have over 4000 drop-off locations in Canada.

Cellphone recycling in British Columbia
Recycling Council of British Columbia (RCBC) is the main organization that manages the
product stewardship in British Columbia (BC). Currently, Recycle My Cell program is applied
in BC. Before it, Call2Recycle® was the only free battery and cellphone collection program in
this province.
The returned cellphones are refurbished and resold in BC when these recovery options are
possible. A portion of profit from reselling them is assigned to Kids Help Phone program. The
rest of the collected products are transported free of charge to consolidation facilities where the
batteries and the other components of cellphones are separated. Then, they are sent to be
recycled. The recycling facility separates the reusable metals from the batteries, and prepares
them for reuse in new products such as stainless steel and batteries. The objective is to
minimize the materials that are sent to landfills from battery and cellphones.
Recycle My Cell has received regulatory approval from the province of BC, and has acted
as the official cellphone stewardship program in the province. Figure 4 provides an overview
of cellphone recycling in BC. There are some programs and websites related to recycling
electronic devices, but all of them drive traffic to Recycle My Cell.

Cellphone recycling in Nova Scotia
Similar to BC, Nova Scotia (NS) cellphone RL program was initially coped by
Call2Recycle®. Then, the Recycle My Cell was formally recognized as the official cellphone
stewardship program in 2009 in NS. In addition to cellphone, all types of electronic wastes are
delivered to Recycle My Cell. Some organizations (e.g. DivertNS which is a non-profit
organization) work in collaborations with the official recycling organizations. They work
under the department of Nova Scotia Environmental Waste Resource Management. Figure 5
illustrates some facts about cellphone recovery in NS.
The quantity of the devices recovered in the three provinces can be found in Figs. 3, 4 and

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

Figure 3 Cellphone recovery in Canada, URL: http://www.recyclemycell.ca/facts-and-figures/

Case studies
Case studies are useful tools for analyzing problems [45]. Some companies are active in
RL of cellphones in Canada. Some of them are involved in reselling used cellphones,
and the others are responsible for recycling them. We select one company from each

193

Fig. 4 Cellphone recovery in BC, URL: https://www.cwta.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Recycle-My-Cell2015-Annual-Report-for-British-Columbia_For-Submission.pdf

Orchard Labs Inc.
Orchard is an e-commerce corporation located in Toronto, Ontario. It purchases and sells used
cellphones in North America. Orchard began its business by producing different apps for
iPhone that were run thorough diagnostics test for the used cellphones. The company provides
reports including some information such as the values of cellphones in real-time [27]. Orchard

Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

Fig. 5 Cellphone recovery in NS, URL: https://www.cwta.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Recycle-My-Cell2015-Annual-Report-for-Nova-Scotia_For-Submission.pdf

iPhone’s seller. Orchard expanded its business into the U.S. market in 2015 by creating a
facility in San Francisco [6]. Then, it started a business with Public Mobile to provide
refurbished cellphones for the customers of Canadian wireless carriers.
Telus obtained ownership of Public Mobile in 2013, and Orchard was restructured as a
wireless carrier depending on Telus. Orchard’s remanufacturing lines have been extended for
the products of Samsung, Apple, BlackBerry, and HTC. Innovation has been utilized by

195

Greentec Inc.
Greentec processes waste electrical and electronic equipment under supervision of Ontario
electronic stewardship program. The company is well-known in recycling electronic devices.
Greentec processes cellphones that are collected according to Recycle My Cell program. The
facility of the company (150,000 sq. ft.) is located in Cambridge, Ontario. It is equipped with
“electronic waste mining” that can process electronic devices, and can produce materials such
as glass, metal, and plastics. These materials can be used in manufacturing new products.
Qualifying procedures are applied for all products that enter Greentec’s facility to decide the
returned cellphones are appropriate for recovery activities such as reusing, recycling, and
refurbishing. Reusing is preferred because it consumes minimum resources, but it is not possible
in most cases. Majority of the returned cellphones are dismantled and recycled. Appropriate
dismantling is crucial to make sure that the hazardous materials such as Mercury and battery are
not released to landfills. Valuable materials such as Aluminum, Steel, Copper, plastics, and glass
are processed as raw materials for forthcoming manufacturing. The obtained materials are used
to produce new products such as bottles, pipes, automotive components, electronic devices,
house sidings, carpets, and kitchen countertops. Greentec works based on zero landfill policy.

Effects of cannibalization
Cannibalization occurs in the pricing strategy stage, and refers to the decrease in sales volume or
revenue in addition to the market share because of the introduction of a new service or product
[46]. A company that adopts this strategy competes against itself. There are some reasons that a
company may adopt this strategy. A company may would like to rise its market share by
gambling that introducing the new product will harm other competitors more than the company
itself. The other possibility is that the company may believe that the new product will sell better
than the first one, or is sellable to a different type of purchaser. The other reason is the company
may want its products to reach different types of customers. This is a commonly used strategy
by the majority of cellphone companies such as Samsung and Apple. For instance, when Apple
introduced iPad, it took sales away from the original Macintosh, but ultimately led to an
expanded market for consumer computing hardware. In the circumstances that newer iPhone
models are introduced, the cannibalization may occur related to the new products (iPhone 7),
and the classical products (iPhone 6). In this case, there is a competition among the demands of
iPhone 7 and iPhone 6 as long as they are substitutable for the consumers. In other words, more
sale of iPhone 7 can lead to reduction in sale of iPhone 6. The other case of cannibalization is
about the sale of digital cameras [41]. The Camera and Imaging Products Association reported a
36% sales decrease in digital camera sales in 2013 which can be attributed to the growth of
smartphone sales over the same period that was 38% up according to the market research of firm
IDC. Furthermore, cannibalization is important for an Original Equipment Manufacturer
(OEM) because resale can be a threat to sales of new cellphones.


Jnl Remanufactur (2017) 7:181–198

chain. We examined the Canadian cellphone recycling and RL system focusing on three
provinces including British Columbia to represent Western Canada, Ontario to represent
Middle Canada, and Nova Scotia to represent Eastern Canada. The other provinces of Canada
implement similar cellphone recycling programs. We believe that although our focus was
restricted to the mentioned three provinces, the results of this research are applicable to the
other provinces of Canada.
In this paper, we provided answers for the research questions mentioned in the first
section. Our goal was to create an outline of the current situation in Canadian used
cellphone market to provide readers some understanding and a tool for comparison.
We discussed the importance of cellphone RL as well as the differences between
cellphones and the other electronic devices from an RL perspective. We observed
some barriers in the recovery of cellphones which affect the RL flow. Besides, we
examined the EoL practices of cellphones in Canada in addition to the federal and
provincial policies. We observed that the RL of cellphone is largely affected by
collection processes and sources of returned cellphones. From the statistics and the
other observations, it is evident that the collection rate is not substantial compared to
the expectation.
We feel that RL processes in Canada suffer from lack of incentive or motivation for
recycling or reusing used cellphones. Businesses are often guided by money making opportunity and lacks in social responsibility because in some cases, there is less profit involved in
selling refurbished products. The investment for a vendor to sell used cellphones instead of
new ones is not feasible in most cases. For a consumer, incentive for returning a cellphone is
quite low, and social responsibility is often outweighed due to the lack of awareness. More
incentive for buy-back or trade-in with improved communication with customers can help to
gain momentum in collection.
The activities of organizations that manage recycling (for-profit or non-profit), as well as
the reselling companies have not been properly streamlined. Therefore, the RL of cellphones
loses efficiency at different points. A more streamlined and efficient collection system
would allow vendors, manufacturers, remanufacturers, and recyclers to gain scale to
justify investments in more advanced and larger facilities resulting in greater profit.
The manufacturers, distributors, RL companies along with regulators need to take
more concerted efforts to avoid quality leakage and achieve greater efficiency in
different steps of reverse supply chain. For instance, more efficient take-back program, or greater commitment in selling used devices, or improving pre-sorting before
going to shredding to catch more reusable phones and materials can improve efficiency of RL. In addition, stricter intervenes of regulatory bodies, whether municipal
or provincial, can improve the efficiency. Although Recycle My Cell has emerged as
the single biggest company to represent cellphone recycling, and most of the returned
cellphones are funneled into this company, just some provinces have approved it. In
our opinions, Ontario may need some regulations similar to Nova Scotia or British
Columbia.
We believe that the lack of education about cellphone recycling plays a very important role
behind the low rate of collections. The campaigns organized by different companies are often
not visible enough to draw attention. Increased visibility in recycling campaigns and customer

197

We learned from two case studies (Greentec and Orchard) that businesses can position themselves in the right places of RL cycle contributing to the efficiency of the process without
compromising on profitability.
This research is qualitative. We realized that it is very difficult to collect reliable data and
information about RL of cellphones. We noticed that the information is either insufficient or
incomplete or data is not dependable to draw decisive conclusions. One of the reasons for this
deficiency is the low number of investigations in this field. Consequently, we feel that more
quantitative research and analyses of real life scenarios are essential about RL of cellphones.
Moreover, there is not much research about inspection and quality issues of used cellphones
which is necessary to improve the reusability and collection system. Thus, more works need to
be done. Finally, empirical studied should be conducted to find the most effective ways to
organize the reverse supply chain of cellphones, and to compare the RLs of cellphone in
different countries.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the editor and referees for the comments and feedback that
improved the paper. In addition, they would like to thank Dr. Cory Searcy because of the valuable comments for
improving this research.

for innovation and policy. Environ Innov Soc Trans 21:69–79
