
Energy supply and usage, as well as the encouragement of innovation activities are some of the
most important challenges for the EU and for
countries involved in the EU’s Eastern Partnership.1
Increased resource efficiency and innovation in renewable and sustainable energy offer the best potential
to help solve the urgent societal challenge of climate
change. The EU has consequently included the societal
challenges of secure, clean and efficient energy and of
climate action, environment, resource efficiency and
raw materials in its Horizon 2020 program for Research and Innovation (R&I).
A growing body of literature discusses the specific
policy mix for innovation in the energy field and for
sustainable transition. Studies analyze how the policy
mix affects technological innovation for energy transition [Reichardt, Rogge, 2015], how a mix of policy instruments encourages a reduction in energy use (improved energy efficiency [Kern et al., 2017]), or how a
suitable mix of creative and destabilizing instruments
furthers the sustainability transition [Kivimaa, Kern,
2016]. At a higher level of innovation policy, Schot and
Steinmueller [Schot, Steinmueller, 2018] suggest that
it needs to be newly framed with a focus on transformative change, so that the current environmental and
social challenges, such as the energy transition can be
addressed. The socio-technical system transformation
(or transition) is about changing skills, infrastructures,
industry structures, products, regulations, user preferences, and cultural predilections.
One element to deal with these issues is setting incentives for companies to improve the energy efficiency
of their production processes and for producing their
own renewable energy, such as innovation vouchers
that are the focus of this paper. Innovation vouchers
are a funding scheme for small-scale joint innovative
projects among SMEs and research institutions. By
linking the companies up with research performers,
this allows for tackling the critical issue of stimulating
research and business links in the framework of national innovation policies. Despite its innovativeness
and growing diffusion, innovation vouchers have received only limited attention in the literature [Sala et
al., 2016].
Innovation vouchers fit in a broader portfolio of innovation support instruments, which constitute the
innovation policy mix of a country or region. Innovation support instruments can be divided into three
large categories, including regulatory instruments,
economic and financial instruments, and soft instruments [Borras, Edquist, 2013]. Regulatory instruments
use legal tools such as laws and directives, economic
and financial instruments concern pecuniary incen-

tives or disincentives such as grants and taxes, and soft
instruments include recommendations and voluntary
agreements. Innovation vouchers fall under category
two, economic and financial instruments. They need to
be differentiated from vouchers for consumers, which
allow individual consumers to purchase energy efficient products and services [Urpelainen, 2018].
Our focus in this paper is on one specific instrument
in the policy mix, on innovation vouchers, which contribute to energy transition and transformative change.
However, we highlight here the dual benefits of the
instrument: besides its stimulation effect for renewables and improved energy efficiency, we put forward
that its impacts and advantages include connecting research and business players in countries where these
links are weak.
We discuss in this article the results and lessons that
can be learned from the EU-funded ener2i project,
which used vouchers as an innovation policy stimulation instrument in the energy field in the period 20142016.2 We first outline the role of innovation vouchers
as an instrument in innovation policy and in the energy field. This overview is followed by a description of
the innovation voucher competitions for energy, implemented by the ener2i project. We compare the case
study with examples and lessons from other countries
and draw our final conclusions.
Methodologically we can rely on the direct experience
of the authors having coordinated and implemented
ener2i innovation voucher competitions in the four
countries. Furthermore, internal evaluation and analytical reports on the competitions are available as well
as an assessment by an external review panel for ener2i.

Innovation Vouchers as a Financing Tool

Innovation vouchers have become a popular and standard instrument of innovation policy in EU member
states and other world regions over the last several
years. A survey among European funding organizations conducted by the European Commission in
2009 showed that the number of innovation voucher
schemes before 2006 was rather low: there were only
about three schemes in total. They, however, multiplied quickly and reached already 23 voucher schemes
in Europe in 2009, including 13 EU member states and
two non-EU member states3 [European Commission,
2009]. More EU countries have followed suit since
then.4
The schemes all differ in details, but the main aim of
the instrument is to stimulate cooperation between
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and research
organizations. As a result the competitiveness of SMEs

	 The EU Eastern Partnership is a cooperation framework involving the EU and its member states with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova,
and Ukraine. The Partnership was launched in 2009 and is currently focused on strengthening institutions and good governance, economic development
and market opportunities, better interconnectivity, and mobility and stronger society through people-to-people contacts. See https://eeas.europa.eu/
diplomatic-network/eastern-partnership/419/eastern-partnership_en, last accessed 25.10.2018.
2
	 See www.ener2i.eu, last accessed 25.10.2018.
3
	Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, France, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Slovenia, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Innovation vouchers are of course in use also in other global regions, for example in Australia.
4
	 For example, the Czech Republic [Matulova et al., 2015] and Lithuania [Atanavicius et al., 2016].
1



is strengthened by supporting the development of innovations at the firm level. In EU Eastern Partnership
countries, innovation vouchers help establish and reestablish the links between research and business organizations. These linkages are a main concern for the
region, as they were in many cases broken due to the
economic transformation process the countries went
through.
In the classical approach, the voucher budget amounts
to 5,000–20,000 euro. Usually, the budget is allocated
to an SME to purchase research services from research
performing organizations [OECD, 2010a]. Vouchers
are characterized by low entry barriers, in the sense
that it is relatively easy for organizations to apply for
and report on their projects. Overall the administrative procedures are kept to a minimum.
The encouragement of research-business collaboration, as a subset of innovation policy, also includes a
portfolio of instruments into which vouchers fit.5 This
portfolio ranges from instruments with low budget
and low entry barriers (such as vouchers) to support
of larger scale collaborative projects, the creation of
competence centers, Science and Technology Parks,
incubators, and more complex Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs). A well-developed portfolio requires
a costly investment from public sources [Nauwelaers,
2018]. Such investment is difficult to finance for lower
income countries, such as the target countries of innovation voucher competitions in ener2i, which were
Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, and Moldova.
Typical activities to be implemented with the voucher scheme include prototyping, market and feasibility studies, material and design studies, and other research and consultancy services. Vouchers offer several advantages for innovation systems in the EU Eastern
Partnership countries:
•	 They require relatively low public investment in
the program. While the grant seems low, it must
be considered that prices in the region are generally much lower than, for example, in Western European countries, and consequently the impact of
the grant is more significant.
•	 They help to build contacts and foster a collaborative culture among research and business actors.
•	 They address the lack of demand from business for
research services (a weakness often mentioned by
researchers in the region).
•	 They allow a project pipeline to be developed for
more significant support programs or investment.
A quantitatively higher amount of innovation
vouchers can serve as a testing ground for more
significant cooperation among research and business actors.
With the help of collaborative schemes for researchbusiness cooperation, the innovation systems should

go beyond technology adoption from abroad and stimulation should be provided for local technology development and innovation activities [Gulda et al., 2018].

Application of Innovation Vouchers in the
Energy Field

Innovation vouchers are usually used in thematically
open competitions, where applications dealing with all
different areas are possible. We can observe, however,
that there are also thematically focused competitions,
which request applications in specific fields such as
energy [European Commission, 2011]. The instrument
in question was promoted in Europe under the title
“Green Innovation Vouchers” for usage in sectors or
areas with a positive environmental impact [European
Commission, 2011].
In the ener2i project, innovation vouchers were used
to support SMEs in becoming more energy efficient
and produce renewable energy. This allowed them to
innovate their production, reduce costs, and become
more competitive. The background of the ener2i project was that both energy and innovation are core policy fields of the EU. With the Clean Energy Package
of 2016 [European Commission, 2016], the EU strives
to accelerate the energy transition to renewables and
energy efficiency in its efforts to limit climate change.
Energy transition is also an important business opportunity for energy producers, energy service providers,
and for new entrants on the energy market.
Another interesting example of innovation vouchers
for energy projects is currently (2017-2018) under implementation in Ukraine.6 Climate innovation vouchers amounting to 20,000 euro each were allocated to
companies for reducing energy use, greenhouse gas
emissions, and the energy intensity of production. The
total budget of the scheme amounts to 1 million euro,
which is financed by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Innovation vouchers need to be discussed in the context of innovative financing. Recent approaches to
generating financing for renewable energy and energy
efficiency, which have gained momentum, are energy
cooperatives and crowdfunding. They mobilize investments from citizens and are in this sense socially innovative instruments [Spiesberger et al., 2018]. A sizeable
number of energy cooperatives has joined forces in the
European Federation of Renewable Energy Cooperatives (REScoop)7 and received EU support. A specific
project was also supported under the EU’s Horizon
2020 program to facilitate crowdfunding for renewable energy8. Innovation vouchers in the case of ener2i
allocated public financing for power generation from
renewables and increased energy efficiency, but they
also encouraged additional investments from beneficiary SMEs. We can therefore file it also under socially
innovative approaches to energy financing.

	 For an overview of instruments see for example [Nauwelaers, 2018].
	 http://innovoucher.com.ua/?lang=en, last accessed 25.10.2018.
7
	 https://www.rescoop.eu/, last accessed 25.10.2018.
8
	 http://www.crowdfundres.eu/, last accessed 25.10.2018.
5
6

72



Таble 1. Local Innovation Voucher Managers
under the Ener2i Project
Country
Moldova
Belarus
Armenia
Georgia

Organization
Agency for Innovation and Technology Transfer,
AITT
Belarusian Innovation Fund, BIF
Energy Efficiency Centre Georgia, EECG
Technology Transfer Association, TTA

Source: authors.

The Implementation of the Innovation
Voucher Instrument in the Ener2i Project

The innovation voucher scheme was implemented in
Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, and Moldova for the first
time in 2014-2016 in the framework of the EU’s FP7funded ener2i project. The instrument was applied
only in the energy field.
Ener2i was coordinated by the Centre for Social Innovation (ZSI) from Austria. The voucher competition
was conceptualized and implemented under the guidance of ZSI and the project partners included energy
engineers from Germany. Four local voucher competition managers, one for each of the target countries,
were in charge of local management (Table  1). The
tasks of the local country managers were the operational implementation of the voucher scheme, including the organization, promotion and execution of the
competition in the respective target country. This
included supporting the candidates during proposal
preparation, issuing contracts for beneficiaries, monitoring the project’s progress during implementation,
and collecting the project reports afterwards. The
competitions were financed by the EU via ener2i.9
The partners launched a call, evaluated, and financed
projects with a budget of 4,000 euro per voucher. Each
competition was held on a small scale with a total of
six vouchers allocated each in Armenia and Georgia,
seven in Belarus, and 11 in Moldova (Table 2). This
was due to the pilot character of the action.
The voucher was allocated to an SME that had to collaborate with a research partner. Thus, the research
work was driven by the needs of the company and performed in a collaborative way. This approach has to be
seen in a different light from the linear approach to innovation, which can usually be observed in the target
countries of ener2i, whereby research results are generated by universities and public research organizations
and are then applied and transferred to business or
society. The voucher budget could be spent on R&Drelated manpower required for project implementation
(e.g., technology or market studies, prototyping, energy or innovation audits, etc.), material and equipment,
and travel arrangements facilitating knowledge transfer at the national and international levels.
SMEs according to the European Commission’s definition [European Commission, 2003] were eligible to

participate in the ener2i voucher scheme, including
start-up businesses and new companies established by
researchers (spin-offs) with energy related innovation
targets. The project could deal with innovations in renewable energy technologies (RES) or improving the
energy efficiency (EE) of production processes. The established cooperation projects were meant to be pilot
programs, which should become good practice examples and therefore initiate further cooperation.
Suitable projects were research and development
(R&D) services, such as technology and market surveys, feasibility studies or energy and innovation audits, and implementation-oriented R&D activities,
such as the development of prototypes, engineering
services, or environmental compatibility.
In comparison to other innovation voucher schemes,
the ener2i competition had some particularities. Usually,
participating enterprises first receive funding and afterwards they search for a cooperating research institution
to provide the necessary knowledge. In the case of ener2i, the applying SMEs have to initially prove in their
proposals that they have identified a research organization, with whom they intend to implement the project.
This must be done before any funding decision is made.
In many innovation voucher schemes the project teams
receive the whole amount of funding after finishing
their project and on the condition that they present a
final report on the results of the project and thus justify
the voucher budget. In ener2i, the supported project
teams received 60% of the amount of the voucher at
the beginning of the project and the remaining 40% after handing in the implementation report. Apart from
that, the project duration of six months was shorter
than that offered by other voucher schemes, where
durations can be up up to 12 months. Furthermore, it
was obligatory in several schemes that the companies
spend a defined percentage of their own money on the
projects. In ener2i, companies have to opportunity to
voluntarily make their own contribution, but it is not
obligatory.
Proposals for the ener2i innovation voucher competition had to be submitted online and in English. All
submitted proposals had to pass two assessment-steps,
the pre-assessment (eligibility check) and the final

Таble 2. Overview of Proposals and Funded
Projects over all 5 IVCs
Belarus Belarus Moldova Georgia Armenia Sum
1
2
Proposals
8
15
34
18
14
88
Eligibility
check
passed
Projects
funded

7

13

29

18

10

77

4

3

11

6

6

30

Source: authors.

	 The call documentation, including Terms of Reference and Application Form are available at the project website: https://ener2i.
eu/innovation_vouchers/about_iv_competition, last accessed 25.10.2018.

9

2019



Figure 2. Categories of Spending of Ener2i
Innovation Vouchers (%)

Figure 1. Тhematic Distribution of all Projects
Funded over Innovation Vouchers
Photovoltaics

	

7

Solar thermal energy

6

Biomass

3

Wind energy

1

Energy efficient production processes

	

Energy efficient building
Energy efficient lighting

Material cost
44

6

	

Cost for services from
research organisations

2

20

Personnel cost
Travel cost

5
2

25

Other cost

Source: authors.

Source: authors.

evaluation by an international panel composed of experts from the ener2i consortium and local energy and
innovation specialists. The number of submitted proposals was nearly three times higher than the vouchers available: this shows that the IVC was an attractive
funding instrument for all countries under consideration. It is also evidence of the perceived potential for
innovation in all four countries
Thematic Fields of Ener2i Vouchers
The voucher projects were implemented over the years
2015-2016 and covered different energy-related topics, including solar energy, construction materials, and
biomass for power and heat generation10. Of the funded
projects, 13 dealt with energy efficiency and 17 with different renewable energy technologies. For some, this
categorization is ambiguous and the figures give only
a rough idea of the projects’ focus. One example is a
project on the use of alternative energy sources in fish
farming. We categorized it as a photovoltaic project, but
it could also be defined as a project dealing with improving the energy efficiency of a production process.
A more detailed analysis shows that 13 of the realized
projects focused on solar energy (Figure 1), either photovoltaic (7) or solar thermal (6). Given that there are
more than 200 days of sunlight in Moldova, Armenia,
and Georgia, it is reasonable that so many projects focused on using this resource with such high potential.
Three projects dealt with biomass-to-energy, predominantly pellet or briquette production. Only one project was devoted to wind energy, more concretely, the
short-time forecasting of wind speeds.
The projects on energy efficiency can be divided into
three groups. Six of the 13 projects aimed at improving the energy efficiency of production processes, five
dealt with the energy efficiency of buildings or the development of energy efficient construction materials.
One project focused on energy efficient street lighting
and another dealt with the development of new photoluminescent materials, which could make electrical
lighting redundant in some applications like emergency signs.
10

9

For all projects, roughly half (44%) of the IV budget
was spent on services from research institutions, this is
the category toward which most of the budget was allocated (Figure 2). Personnel costs accounted for a fifth
(20%) of the spending. In some cases it was not clear
whether the spending referred to the project team or
external personnel (e.g., research partners). A quarter (25%) of the budget was used for materials, while
much less was spent on business trips. Travel costs accounted for just 9 %.
The flexibility in the use of the voucher budget was
noted by the project managers. This is reflected by in
diversity of the spending. In other innovation voucher
schemes with a similar budget, spending is often limited to consulting services [OECD, 2010b]. This flexibility made it possible to fund very diverse project
proposals and it also enabled implementation-oriented projects, which is proven by a number of the prototypes that were constructed.
Impact of Innovation Voucher Schemes
Not many assessments of voucher schemes are available. An example is a support program for generic
innovation vouchers (not energy-specific) that has
been implemented in Lithuania for several years already. An evaluation of the 2012-2014 calls was conducted in 2016 and revealed good results yielded by
the scheme [Atanavicius et al., 2016]. During this period, three calls were implemented and a total of 815
projects were funded with 3.5 million euro; 776 of the
projects were completed successfully. The vouchers
had a positive impact upon the engagement of SMEs
in R&D activities. About 20 % of the SMEs surveyed in
the evaluation, which had no R&D experience before
the voucher project, had launched new R&D activities shortly after the end of the voucher project. Of the
surveyed SMEs, 66.5 % either continued to cooperate
with the research organization or intended to do so
after the project. No significant impact on SME’s business productivity and competitiveness indicators was
quantitatively measured, which is not surprising given
the limited scope of vouchers. However, in the survey

Information on funded projects is also accessible at the project website: https://ener2i.eu/innovation_vouchers/funded_projects,
last accessed 25 October 2018.


among voucher recipients, two-thirds of respondents
noted that the instrument had a positive effect on the
development of new products and services as well as
competences. It was found that successful examples
of SMEs also include some that managed to follow up
and receive funding from more significant funding
programs [Bullinger et al., 2017]. As a consequence,
experts recommended introducing a complementary,
more substantial follow-on scheme, in Lithuania’s innovation policy mix [Bullinger et al., 2017].
An internal evaluation of the energy specific innovation voucher action was conducted by ener2i through
an analysis of the final evaluation of the voucher projects and through reporting sessions. In Moldova, all
voucher project participants were convened for a reporting meeting and question and answer sessions
took place in front of a committee composed of national and international experts. Evidence from this
internal evaluation demonstrated that contacts among
SMEs and research performers were successfully created, prototypes were developed, and technology assessments conducted. In several cases, international
cooperation increased, either through the attendance
of fairs or cooperation with research organizations.
For example, a Moldovan and Belarusian SME each
worked with a German research organization on the
certification and development of solar devices while
a Georgian SME worked with a Czech university on
street lighting with photovoltaics.
Cases with a particularly significant impact included
a Moldovan farm, which became independent from
the centralized power and heating systems. It used
its own bio-resources that were processed into pellets for power and heat generation. The Moldovan
technical university served as the research partner
and helped optimize the collection and production
processes for this form of bioenergy. As a result, the
cost of energy consumption was cut and know-how
spread to farm enterprises in the same village. Again
in Moldova, a young entrepreneur granted support
to work with Moldova State University on developing an energy independent greenhouse for organic
food production. Based on the prototype developed,
the company was able to build additional industrial
greenhouses, with a total area of 1,000 square meters, employing seven or eight different technologies.
Overall, this project had a large impact upon the
growth of the company, according to the owner. In
Belarus, a company received a voucher to work with
a German research partner, Next Energy, on verifying research results about solar modules with wearresistant coating, which increases the efficiency and
the durability of solar cells and modules.11

Conclusions

From the experience of the ener2i voucher competition, we can draw several conclusions. First, minimal
bureaucratic effort should be required from the SMEs
during the application procedure and implementation
11

of innovation voucher projects. The ease of the application will ensure that many SMEs attempt to participate and thereby encourage innovation in their respective countries.
Second, keeping in mind that the instrument of innovation vouchers was new in the four countries where it
was applied in the framework of the ener2i project, implementation was successful and the results were more
than satisfactory. This was proven by the ener2i internal evaluation and the success of the scheme was also
acknowledged by the External Review Panel for the
project [Weiss, 2015]. The panel found out that vouchers attracted attention for the SMEs and that winning
a voucher was directly related to national and international recognition. Some of the successful SMEs used
the voucher as marketing instrument for their companies. The ener2i innovation vouchers were also included as a good practice case in a review report by the
Moldovan Research and Innovation System [Gulda et
al., 2016], which was implemented by an expert panel
under the Horizon 2020 Policy Support Facility (PSF)
in the period of November 2015-July 2016.
Third, the design of the voucher scheme needs to be
adapted to national requirements. For example, if beneficial for the project results, companies should also be
allowed to receive part of the funds. In classical voucher
schemes, the budget is allocated to the SME, which has
to use it for paying for the services of an R&D service
provider. In ener2i, both the SME and research partner could receive shares of the budget. This proved well
adapted to the local circumstances, because it encouraged SME participation and commitment to the project. From the feedback submitted during the evaluation, we could gather that the scheme allocated public
grant money to local SMEs for innovation activities for
the first time. In the use of the voucher budget, relative flexibility was granted to the project partners. The
budget could be spent on various items and a project
team from Moldova gave positive feedback: “One more
advantage of the innovation voucher was the possibility of using the obtained money for all necessary items.”
Budget categories included travel costs and therefore
cooperation with international partners was possible.
These features of the scheme enabled international
partnerships to be created through ener2i vouchers,
which was highly appreciated by the voucher grantees.
Furthermore, the payment schedule has to take account
of the local situation. While in most schemes the payment of the voucher amount is done at the end of the
project against submitted invoices, the ener2i project
stipulates an upfront payment of 60% of the voucher
amount with the remaining 40% paid after the completion of the project. This was necessary to kick-start the
projects given the difficult task of obtaining loads at affordable interest rates in the target countries.
Fourth, the assessments of voucher schemes face specific challenges. The impact of a low budget instrument
is normally limited and the measurement of impact
in quantitative terms is difficult and in several cases



impossible. Its main focus is on solving small scale
problems and more importantly, on building linkages
between SMEs and research organizations. The impact
of the ener2i innovation voucher managing organizations (innovation funds) in Moldova and Belarus was
obvious. They gained knowledge about how to implement this innovation stimulation instrument and it
enlarged their possible portfolio of instruments. This
instrument involves, however, the risk of failure and
this risk needs to be accepted by the programming and
funding authorities.
Finally, we can state that innovation vouchers are an
innovation policy instrument well suited for the needs
of EU Eastern Partnership countries. These countries
have an important SME sector and limited public budgets. With the help of a limited investment, innova-

tion vouchers serve the purpose here of establishing
or re-establishing links between research and business.
However, vouchers alone are not enough and a more
comprehensive portfolio of support instruments and
a conducive environment for research-business collaboration are also required. Vouchers can obviously
help solve smaller specific problems for SMEs, but in a
support chain for innovation more substantial funding
will also be required. In general, the voucher instrument is becoming more frequently used in the energy
and sustainable technology fields and has proved its
utility.
This article is based on work performed in the project ener2i, funded
by the EU in its 7th Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development (FP7).

