Introduction

In January of 2008 the paper “What Drives Natural Gas Prices?" by Stephen P.A. Brown and Mine
K. Yücel was published in the Energy Journal (Brown and Yücel, 2008). This paper analyzes the
drivers of natural-gas prices by estimating a long-run relationship between gas prices and oil prices,
and buttressing the model by controlling for natural-gas-market specific factors. The paper has received 294 citations as of this writing according to Google Scholar.1 The majority of these citations
have occurred since 2013, and include eight citations in 2019 and 30 citations in 2018, indicating continued strong interest in the analysis of the impact of crude-oil prices and other factors on
natural-gas prices. In this paper, I replicate the analysis of Brown and Yücel (2008) by re-collecting
the data, and expanding the sample of the analysis to include data generated as recently as June
2017.
The articles that cite Brown and Yücel (2008) relate to a diverse set of research questions including reexaminations of the relationship between gas and oil prices, the policy implications of links
between gas and oil markets, and other topics. Some articles point out that the long-run relationship
between natural-gas prices and crude-oil prices appears to be rather weak, or to have disappeared
altogether, especially when data from post-2008 are included in the analysis, as increasing supplies
of natural gas associated with the shale revolution began to impact the market (Erd˝
os, 2012; Ramberg and Parsons, 2012). Brigida (2014) rediscovered a strong relationship between gas prices and
oil prices by allowing shifts in the cointegrating vector, but Caporin and Fontini (2017) find mixed
evidence of such a long run relationship in a model that controls for new production of natural gas
from shale reservoirs. One recent article found that shale gas has significantly depressed crude oil
price in contrast to the more popular view that crude oil prices drive natural gas prices (Liu and Li,
2018). Others have discovered similar links between crude-oil and natural-gas prices in different
markets such as the German natural-gas market (Nick and Thoenes, 2014). Importantly, many of
the articles that cite Brown and Yücel (2008) discuss policy implications related to the relationship
between crude-oil and natural-gas prices, so changes to this relationship must be examined in order
to update such policy implications, for example see Pettersson et al. (2012) and Brown et al (2010).
There are several benefits associated with the replication of the analysis of Brown and Yücel
(2008). First, it offers an independent verification of the results over the same sample period. Indeed, the results of my replication are qualitatevely similar to the results presented in Brown and
Yücel (2008). Small quantitative differences likely result from differences in the data collection process, which are discussed in more detail below. Second, some of the data from the original analysis
were collected from a proprietary dataset, while this replication uses data that was collected from
the original public data sources. Therefore, the data can be disseminated to interested scholars
for further replication and analyses. Third, a cataclysmic shift in natural gas markets, and energy
markets more generally, was beginning to occur just at the end of the sample period of the Brown
and Yücel (2008) analysis, as the shale revolution was beginning to take hold and to drastically increase the supply of natural gas in the United States. This replication indicates that the relationship
between crude-oil prices and natural-gas prices espoused in Brown and Yücel (2008) was knocked
out of whack after the end of the original sampling period, and I suspect that the shale revolution
was the primary culprit in this relational change. The format of this replication follows the format of Brown and Yücel (2008) closely for ease
of comparison with the original paper. In Section 2, industry rules-of-thumb for the relationship
between gas and oil prices are discussed and analyzed in Subsection 2.1, and burner-tip parity
rules are discussed and analyzed in Subsection 2.2. In Section 3, a vector-error correction model
is utilized in a more advanced appraisal of the effect of crude-oil prices on natural-gas prices.
Subsection 3.1 provides a detailed description of the data and the data collection process from
publicly available sources for this replication study, while Subsection 3.2 presents the econometric
model and associated results. Section 4 offers concluding remarks.

2

The Relationship Between Oil and Natural Gas Prices

2.1

Simple Rules of Thumb

Brown and Yücel (2008) discuss two commonly employed industry rules-of-thumb in their analysis
of the relationship between crude-oil and natural-gas prices. Both rules are constant ratios of crudeoil price to natural-gas price. These are the 10-to-1 rule and the 6-to-1 rule. The 10-to-1 rule was
commonly applied by industry stakeholders because it provided a relatively good fit to historical
price data. The 6-to-1 rule was applied because it reflects the higher energy content of a barrel of
crude oil. Natural gas is priced in U.S. dollars per million British thermal units ($/MMBtu), while
crude oil is priced in dollars per barrel. There are approximately 6 MMBtu of energy content in a
barrel of crude oil. The 6-to-1 rule reflects this energy-content difference.
Figure 1 is analogous to Figure 1 in Brown and Yücel (2008). It charts the actual Henry Hub
natural-gas price in levels, and the natural-gas prices implied by the 10-to-1 and 6-to-1 rules given
the West Texas Intermediate crude-oil price.2 The vertical line just to the right of 2007 in Figure 1
indicates the last week of the Brown and Yücel (2008) dataset, which occurred in June 2007. As
indicated by Brown and Yücel (2008), the 10-to-1 rule offers a better fit than the 6-to-1 rule until
approximately 2005, when the actual Henry Hub price begins to converge to the 6-to-1 rule. Using
the expanded dataset we see that the 10-to-1 rule has consistently overestimated the Henry Hub
natural-gas price since 2005, while the 6-to-1 rule offered a relatively good fit until early 2009.
Since early 2009, however, both the 10-to-1 and 6-to-1 rule have greatly overestimated the Henry
Hub natural-gas price, even after the precipitous decrease in crude-oil prices that began in 2014.

2.2

Burner-Tip Parity Rules

The 6-to-1 rule implicitly assumes a demand-side driven long-run relationship between crude-oil
prices and natural-gas prices, because it implies prices per unit of energy should be held in check
by demand-side substitution – if one of the commodities is more expensive per unit of energy then
consumers should shift consumption toward the other commodity keeping the difference in prices
between the two commodities in check.

Burner-tip parity rules represent a more nuanced view of demand-side competition between
crude-oil and natural-gas prices. Rather than simply positing that the ratio between crude-oil prices
and natural-gas prices should be constant, burner-tip parity rules account for the fact that barrels of
crude oil do not directly compete with MMBtus of natural gas at the burner tip (point of conversion
to energy). Natural gas generally competes more directly with either Residual Fuel Oil (RFO) or
Distillate Fuel Oil (DFO) at the burner tip, as these are the most commonly used petroleum products
in the generation of electricity and/or space heating. Burner-tip parity rules also account for cost
differentials between transporting natural gas to the burner tip versus transporting these petroleum
products to the burner tip, where the former is generally more costly as a result of the need for
pipeline capacity. Let PHH,t be the price of natural gas per MMBtu at the Henry Hub in Louisiana
at time t (the U.S. benchmark natural-gas price), let PW T I,t be the price per barrel of crude oil at
Cushing, Oklahoma (the U.S. benchmark crude-oil price), let PBT,t be the price per barrel of the
petroleum product that directly competes with natural gas at the burner tip, let EBT be the energy
content in MMBtu of the petroleum product that directly competes with natural gas at the burner
tip, and let T be the transportation cost differential (the cost of transporting the petroleum product

4

The T term in equation (1) is negative if the cost of transporting natural gas from the Henry Hub
to the burner tip is more than the cost of transporting the petroleum product to the burner tip,
and the natural-gas price will be lower to reflect this higher transportation cost to market. Note
that if T is zero, if the price of the petroleum product is equal to the WTI price of crude oil, and
if the petroleum product has an energy content of 6 MMBtu then the burner-tip parity rule is the
6-to-1 rule. However, T is generally negative, the prices of RFO and DFO generally differ from
the WTI price, and RFO and DFO do not have the same energy content as a barrel of crude oil,
so the burner-tip parity rule represents a more nuanced approach, as pointed out by Brown and
Yücel (2008). Importantly, burner-tip parity rules implicitly assume that several terms are not time
varying including the transportation cost differential, the ratio of the petroleum product price to
the WTI price, and the energy content of the petroleum product.
Brown and Yücel (2008) offer estimates of these terms for RFO and DFO. The energy content
of a barrel of RFO is given as 6.287 MMBtu per barrel, while the energy content of a barrel of DFO
is given as 5.825 MMBtu.3 The price ratios of RFO price to WTI price and DFO price to WTI price
are given as 0.85 and 1.2, respectively.4 Finally, the transportation cost differentials are reported as
-$0.25 for RFO and -$0.80 for DFO in Brown and Yücel (2008). Plugging these numbers into (1)
and simplifying gives
PHH,t = −0.25 + 0.1325PW T I,t
(2)
and
PHH,t = −0.80 + 0.2060PW T I,t

(3)

The natural-gas prices implied by the RFO burner-tip parity rule and the DFO burner-tip parity
rule are charted in Figure 2 along side the actual Henry Hub natural-gas price from June 1997 to
June 2017. The vertical line just to the right of 2007 in Figure 1 marks the end of the original sample from Brown and Yücel (2008). Figure 2 is analogous to Figure 2 in Brown and Yücel (2008).
The RFO burner-tip parity rule provides a relatively good fit to the actual Henry Hub natural-gas
price before beginning to regularly overestimate the Henry Hub price just as the Brown and Yücel
(2008) dataset ends in the summer of 2007. The DFO burner-tip rule regularly overestimates the
Henry hub price for the entirety of the sample. The overestimation by both of the burner-tip parity
rules becomes quite extreme after the Brown and Yücel (2008) sample ends, similar to the situation
with the 10-to-1 and 6-to-1 rules.
The upshot of this discussion is that simple rules of thumb and burner-tip parity rules, especially
the 6-to-1 rule and the RFO burner-tip parity rule, worked quite well between June 1997 and June
2007. However, these rules began to perform extremely poorly after 2007 when the shale revolution
3 The EIA gives the same energy content for RFO in Appendix G of its 2016 Annual Energy Outlook, while it gives a
slightly lower energy content for DFO of 5.778 MMBtu per barrel EIA (2016). We use the numbers from Brown and Yücel
(2008) for ease of comparison.
4 Using monthly price data from the EIA, I found that the average ratio for RFO to WTI from 1997 to 2017 was approximately 0.80 rather than 0.85, however it is closer to 0.85 from 1997 to 2007 – the original sample period. I use 0.85 in the
calculations and chart to follow for ease of comparison. I found that the average ratio for DFO to WTI was almost exactly
1.2 from 1997 to 2017.

began to take hold, and the U.S. economy began to recover from the great recession. This is not to
say, however, that the relationship between crude-oil prices and natural-gas prices completely broke
after the Brown and Yücel (2008) sample period ended in 2007. Brown and Yücel (2008) included
exogenous covariates in one of their models in an attempt to control for shocks to natural-gas
prices that might be independent of crude-oil price movements. These include weather indicators
and natural gas storage levels.

3

Seasonality, Weather, Storage and Other Factors Driving Natural Gas Prices

Opportunities for fuel switching between petroleum products and natural gas were already in decline during the Brown and Yücel (2008) sample period as electricity generation from petroleum

6

International Journal for Re-Views in Empirical Economics - IREE

products decreased steadily in the early-2000s, while electricity generation from natural gas continued to increase. Indeed, another paper appearing in the same issue of the Energy Journal studied
this phenomenon and its effects on the relationship between crude-oil and natural-gas prices more
explicitly by including a covariate that accounted for the capacity-weighted heat rate of petroleumproduct generators and natural-gas generators (Hartley et al., 2008). According to the EIA’s Electricity Data Browser5 approximately 197,000 barrels of petroleum products (1,182,000 MMBtu)
were consumed in the generation of electricity in 2001, while 82,000 barrels (492,000 MMBtu)
were consumed in 2007, and 21,000 barrels (126,000 MMBtu) were consumed in 2016. On the
other hand, 5,800,000 MMBtu of natural gas was burned in the generation of electricity in 2001,
while 7,000,000 MMBtu were consumed in 2007, and 10,400,000 MMBtu were consumed in 2016.6
Clearly, natural gas has played an increasingly important role in the generation of electricity in the
U.S. since the turn of the century, while the role played by petroleum products has steadily declined.
Less clear at the time of the publication of Brown and Yücel (2008) was the explosive growth in
natural-gas production that was about to occur in the U.S. as a result of new technologies applied to
shale-gas reservoirs. The same technologies would eventually lead to explosive growth in crude-oil
production, but not until much later, and not until after U.S. crude-oil production declined substantially throughout the original Brown and Yücel (2008) sample period.
Brown and Yücel (2008) were aware of the possibility that factors other than demand-side
competition might lead to deviations from any long-run relationship that exists between crude-oil
and natural-gas prices, and thus included a model in their analysis that attempted to control for such
factors. In particular, the second model presented in their paper controls for “seasonality, extreme
weather events, natural gas in storage, and disruptions to production." In particular, seasonality
and extreme weather events are controlled for by using temperature data as well as deviations from
normal seasonal temperatures, while natural gas in storage is used to control for a variety of possible
natural-gas demand and supply shocks, and hurricane data are used to control for hurricane-related
supply disruptions. A primary question in this replication is whether these control variables alone
are enough to adjust for the tectonic changes that have occurred in gas and oil markets since 2007.
I find that while the inclusion of these control variables does not lead to the maintenance of the
long-run relationship between natural-gas and crude-oil prices, a model including these covariates
continues to explain natural-gas prices quite well.

3.1

Data

The variables used in this replication are analogous to the variables used in the original Brown
and Yücel (2008) paper. The primary variables of interest are weekly natural-gas prices and weekly
crude-oil prices from the week ending June 13, 1997 to the week ending June 16, 2017 (the original
dataset ended on the week ending June 8, 2007). Weekly spot prices of the Henry Hub natural-gas
price and the WTI crude-oil price are collected from the EIA. Brown and Yücel (2008) collected
these data as a weekly series from the Haver Analytics database,7 which was originally derived
from prices reported in the Wall Street Journal. Logged crude-oil and natural-gas prices are used for the remainder of the analysis. Brown and Yücel (2008) logged the price series due to the large
degree of volatility occurring in these series over the original sampling period.
The weather variables, used to control for the seasonal nature of natural-gas demand and
natural-gas demand shocks associated with extreme temperatures, are heating degree days (HDD),
deviations from normal heating degree days (HDDDEV), cooling degree days (CDD), and deviations from normal cooling degree days (CDDDEV). Heating degree days measure the magnitude
of the difference between the recorded temperature in a location and 65 degrees Fahrenheit when
the temperature is below 65 degrees, while cooling degree days measure the magnitude of the
difference between the recorded temperature and 65 degrees Fahrenheit when the temperature is
greater than 65 degrees. The idea is to measure the demand for heating or cooling, respectively, in
a given location. Deviations from normal degree days measure the difference between degree days
in a given week, and the average degree days for that week since 1971. The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) collects degree day data and makes it available for public use.
I collected weekly observations of these degree day data directly from NOAA’s website.8 Brown and
Yücel (2008) acquired their degree day data from Haver Analytics. The degree day data used in
this replication is aggregated to the continental U.S., as the continental U.S. represents the primary
market of interest to the original analysis. Importantly, the aggregation process applied by NOAA
involves population weighting, e.g., an extremely cold day in New York City will lead to a larger
addition to aggregate heating degree days than a similarly cold day in Laramie, Wyoming. The
inclusion of the raw population-weighted degree day series in the model controls for seasonality
in addition to controlling for weather, while deviations from normal degree days controls for the
impact of weather surprises such as a polar vortex. Indeed, the impact of the large polar vortex
on natural-gas prices in the U.S. during the winter of 2013 and 2014 can be seen in Figures 1 and 2.
Another control variable included in the Brown and Yücel (2008) analysis is deviation from fiveyear average natural-gas storage levels. Weekly working gas in storage is another series collected
from the EIA, where working natural gas is natural gas that is meant to move into and out of storage facilities, as opposed to base gas, which is meant to remain permanently in storage facilities to
maintain pressure and improve operability. When Brown and Yücel (2008) published their paper,
the EIA provided five-year average working-gas storage levels, however, the EIA no longer provides
this data. Therefore, I constructed the five-year average series myself. The first observation in the
weekly working gas in storage series from EIA occurred on the week ending December 31, 1993.
Therefore, the five-year average series only begins to include five years of data during the last week
of 1998. For weeks between June 1997 and December 1997 only three prior observations are used
in the average, while for weeks between January 1998 and December 1998 only four weeks are
used. This is one departure from the original dataset that may lead to some small differences. The
deviation from five-year average series is constructed by subtracting the five-year average series
from the current level of working gas in storage. Above average storage levels should be expected
to exert downward pressure on natural-gas prices, while below average storage levels should be
expected to exert upward pressure on natural-gas prices. Natural gas storage levels reached extremely high levels relative to average in 2012, and the resulting downward impact on prices can
easily be seen in Figures 1 and 2. Importantly, storage deviations from normal accumulate over
time: if natural gas in storage is higher than average one week, then it can only come back to
average the following week if above average demand leads to above average storage withdrawals.

I will return to this point in my discussion of the results of the stationarity tests below.
The last control variable used in the analysis is production shut-in levels associated with hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) distributes press
releases that summarize the impact of hurricanes on crude oil and natural gas production in the
Gulf of Mexico.9 These reports include the aggregate natural gas production that was shut-in associated with Gulf hurricanes over a time period. I constructed the hurricane shut-in data series by
simply dividing the aggregate shut-in production over the number of weeks affected.10 This shut-in
variable is zero for time periods in which no hurricane impact is present.

3.2

Model Specification

The first step taken by Brown and Yücel (2008), and the first step that should be taken in any
cointegration analysis, is the testing of the time series of interest for the presence of unit roots.
Table 1 is analogous to Table 1 in Brown and Yücel (2008), but with several additional tests. The
top section of Table 1 displays the results of Augmented Dickey-Fuller Unit Root Tests (ADF tests)
on the time series variables of interest. The second and third columns, labeled “Levels (BY)" and
“Differences (BY)" display test statistics from the original Brown and Yücel (2008) analysis, where
differences are only tested in the case that the null hypothesis of non-stationarity was not rejected
in the series levels. The fourth and fifth columns, labeled “Levels (replication)" and “Differences
(replication)" give the results of tests applied to my data over the Brown and Yücel (2008) sampling
period, while the fifth and sixth columns labeled “Levels (full)" and “Differences (full)" give the test
statistics from the updated full dataset, which ends in June 2017 rather than June 2007.
Brown and Yücel (2008) do not explicitly mention the data-generating process they are assuming under the null hypotheses in any of these ADF tests, i.e., whether the underlying autoregression
contains a trend term or a drift term.11 They also do not discuss the lag order applied in their ADF
tests. Here, I use data visualization to make assumptions about the underlying data-generating
process, and use Stata’s varsoc command to determine the optimal lag order of the univariate autoregression underlying each ADF test. The results of the ADF tests on the logged price series are
presented with and without a trend, while the ADF tests on the remainder of the exogenous covariates does not include a trend. The lag-order used for each ADF test is available upon request.

9 See www.boem.gov/Press-Releases/. The Minerals Management Service of the U.S. Department of Interior was
responsible for these press released when Brown and Yücel (2008) were working on their analysis.
10 Hurricanes Gustav, Ike, Ivan, Katrina, and Rita represent the entirety of hurricanes accounted for in these data. The
BOEM releases a single press release when impacts overlap, which was the case for Gustav and Ike, and for Katrina and
Rita.
11 See Hamilton (1994).

9

International Journal for Re-Views in Empirical Economics - IREE

The ADF tests in Brown and Yücel (2008) failed to reject the null hypothesis of non-stationarity
for both of the logged price series, and strongly reject the null hypothesis of non-stationarity in
the differenced logged price series for both crude-oil and natural-gas prices. I have presented the
Brown and Yücel (2008) results for the price series in the rows labeled with “no trend," as the similarity between their results and my results without a trend included in the data-generating process
cause me to suspect that a trend was not used in their analysis. However, based on visualization
of the crude-oil and natural-gas price series between June 1997 and June 2007, it appears that a
trend should be included. When a trend is included in the Henry Hub natural-price series, the null
hypothesis of non-stationarity is actually rejected at the 5% level over my subsample that matches
the Brown and Yücel (2008) sample indicating the importance of choosing the correct underlying
data-generating process. Small differences in the ADF test statistics are likely attributable to the
use of different lag orders or small differences in the underlying data.
It becomes less clear whether a trend should be included when the ADF tests on the price series
are run on the new full sample. In the full sample, the null hypothesis of non-stationarity is rejected
at the 5% level for logged natural-gas prices when a trend term is excluded, while the null is not
rejected when a trend is included. The ADF tests continue to indicate non-stationarity in the logged
crude-oil price series whether or not a trend is included over the full sample.
The ADF tests on the exogenous covariates all indicate stationarity in the series’ levels, which
is consistent with the Brown and Yücel (2008) results, except for a small inconsistency associated
with the natural-gas-storage variable. Brown and Yücel (2008) mention that “a non-stationary
series means that any shock to the series will have permanent effects on it." One might expect
shocks to deviations from five-year average natural-gas storage variables to have long-lasting effects. Consider a positive shock to natural-gas storage relative to the five-year average. In order
for the difference between current storage levels and their 5-year average level to revert to its average, demand for natural gas would need to be above average subsequent to the positive storage
shock, or production of natural gas would need to be below average, in order to induce increased
storage withdrawals. This possibility of non-stationarity is manifested in the results of the ADF test
on the STOR DIFF variable. The null hypothesis of non-stationarity is not rejected in the STOR
DIFF variable unless a drift term is included in the underlying autoregression in which case the null
hypothesis is rejected at the 1% level. The null hypothesis of non-stationarity is rejected at at least
the 5% level for the levels of all of the exogenous covariates over the new full sample.
I ran additional stationarity tests to further investigate the nature of natural gas and crude oil
price series, especially in light of the somewhat inconsistent results associated with the natural gas
logged levels series. The second section in Table 1 shows the results of Phillips-Perron tests on gas
and oil price series in logged levels and differences. The Phillips-Perron test is analogous to the ADF
test, but applies Newey-West standard errors to account for autocorrelation rather than additional
lags (Hamilton, 1994). The results of the Phillips-Perron tests are similar to ADF tests for both the
replication and full samples, but the null hypothesis of non-stationarity is not rejected for the gas
price series in any specification using the Phillips-Perron test.
Finally, I employed Zivot-Andrews unit root tests, which are analogous to the ADF tests, but
allow for a single unknown structural break in the time series (Baum, 2015). The results of these
tests are displayed in the third section of Table 1. The results of the Zivot-Andrews tests using the replicaton sample are consistent with the results from the other unit root tests. On the other
hand, the Zivot-Andrews tests indicate strong evidence of stationarity in the logged natural gas
price series using the full sample: this means that logged natural gas prices exhibit strong evidence
of stationarity when a single structural break is controlled for. Interestingly, the t-statistic minimizing breakpoint (the break point that makes rejecting the null hypothesis of stationarity most likely)
occurs in the summer of 2008 when the financial crisis was about to jolt commodity markets, and
shale gas was beginning to impact the U.S. natural gas market.
The fourth section of Table 1 presents the results of Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin (KPSS)
tests, which, in conjunction with unit root tests, might reveal fractional integration or a longmemory time-series process.12 In contrast to the other unit root tests presented in Table 1, the
null hypothesis of the KPSS tests is stationarity, which is rejected at at least the 5% level for all of
the logged level price series in both the replication and full sample consistent with the majority of
results from the other unit root tests. However, there is some evidence that logged levels of natural
gas prices display long-memory stationarity: the null hypothesis of a unit root is rejected for logged
natural gas prices when a trend is included in the ADF test using the replication sample, but the null
hypothesis of no unit root is rejected for the same series in the KPSS test – together these imply the
possibility of fractional integration (Lee and Schmidt, 1996); the same can be said for the logged
natural gas series using the full sample, but without a trend.
The next step in a vector-error correction analysis of the effect of crude-oil prices on natural-gas
prices is to apply the Johansen procedure to test for cointegration between the two series (Johansen, 1991 and Johansen, 1988). Tables 2 and 3 display the results of the Johansen tests for the
existence of a cointegrating vector between crude-oil prices and natural-gas prices from the original
Brown and Yücel (2008) analysis, and from my replication using the same sample period. The top
halves of Tables 2 and 3 contain the results of the Johansen tests without including the exogenous
covariates, while the bottom halves contain the results of these tests with the exogenous covariates.
Qualitatevely, the results are similar: the null hypothesis of zero cointegrating vectors between
crude-oil prices and natural-gas prices is rejected with and without the inclusion of the exogenous
covariates. Further, the rejection of the null hypothesis of zero cointegrating vectors becomes much
stronger when the exogenous covariates are included. There does appear to be a small discrepancy in the magnitudes of the test statistics, however. I suspect this is because Brown and Yücel
(2008) applied four lags in the underlying VAR when they performed the Johansen tests, because
when I used four lags in the underlying VAR, my test statistics were almost exactly the same as the
originals.13 However, Table 3 in Brown and Yücel (2008), which is analogous to Tables 6 and 7
in this replication, includes four coefficients for lagged differences of logged crude-oil prices and
logged natural-gas prices indicating that the underlying VAR contains five lags in the estimation
of the VECM, as a lag is lost in the transformation.14 Therefore, I have chosen to display results
of the Johansen procedure with five lags rather than four. This would also explain another small
discrepancy in the Brown and Yücel (2008) analysis. The normalized α coefficients in Table 2 of
12 See Lee and Schmidt (1996) for the theoretical underpinnings related to KPSS and fractional integration, and see Zhang
and Ji (2018) for an example of a long-memory time-series approach applied to oil and gas price cointegration. I thank an
anonymous referee for pointing out this research.
13 These results are available upon request, or can be generated easily by editing the code available with this article.
14 See Hamilton (1994).

Table 4 displays the results of the Johansen tests for the new full sample, while Table 4 displays
the results the post sample period. These new results indicate that any cointegration that may
have existed between logged crude-oil prices and logged natural-gas prices in the original sample
is no longer present when the Johansen tests are applied to the full sample or the post sample.
The Johansen test fails to reject the null hypothesis of zero cointegrating vectors over both samples
whether or not the exogenous covariates are included. This represents an important change since
the original Brown and Yücel (2008) analysis. The β estimates using the new full sample indicate
that a 1% increase in crude-oil price is associated with 0.3% increase in natural-gas price in the long
run, while the post-sample β estimate indicates that a 1% increase in crude-oil price is associated
with a more than 1% increase in natural gas price in the long run. Comparison of the β estimates
across the full and post samples makes clear that there has not been a clear-cut long-run stable
relationship between U.S. crude-oil prices and U.S. natural-gas prices since at least the summer of
2008 – the same time when a structural break was found to occur in the logged natural gas price
series in the Zivot-Andrews tests. Structural changes in natural-gas markets since 2008 appear to
have broken the long-run relationship between crude-oil prices and natural-gas prices that Brown
14

International Journal for Re-Views in Empirical Economics - IREE

and Yücel (2008) (amongst others) discovered in 2008.
Table 4: Bivariate Cointegration Tests (Henry Hub and West Texas Intermediate): Full Sample Table


3.3

Model Results and Interpretation

Now, I turn to the results of the VECM estimation. Table 6 displays the VECM replication results in
bold-face font next to the original Brown and Yücel (2008) results in normal font. Model 1 does not
include the exogenous covariates, while Model 2 does. Table 7 displays the results of the analogous
VECMs using the new full sample in normal font and the post sample in italic font. The estimated
VECM coefficients using the replication sample are similar to the estimated coefficients presented
in Brown and Yücel (2008). The only qualitative discrepancies that appear are sign differences
between the coefficient on the third lag of crude-oil price in Model 1, the second lag of natural-gas
price in Model 1, the first lag of natural-gas price in Model 2, and cooling degree days. None of
these variables are individually statistically important in the original paper or this replication.
The coefficients on the lagged cointegrating errors displayed in the second row of Table 6,
which match the replication α parameters in Table 2 and Table 3, are very similar across the original sample and the replication sample. These coefficients indicate that over the original sampling
period, from June 1997 to June 2007, natural-gas prices adjusted when deviations from the longrun relationship with crude-oil prices occurred. Natural-gas price adjustment towards the long-run
relationship with crude-oil prices occurred at a rate of approximately 5% per week in the model
without the exogenous covariates, while gas prices adjusted at a rate of more than 10% per week
towards the long-run relationship with crude-oil prices when the exogenous covariates are controlled for.
The statistically significant exogenous covariates all have their expected signs in both the original analysis and this replication. These coefficients are also quite similar in magnitude across the
original analysis and replication. Deviations from normal heating degree days, e.g., cold surprises
such as polar vortexes, led to increases in natural-gas prices over the original sample period. Similarly, deviations from normal cooling degree days led to higher natural-gas prices over the original
sample. Lastly, increased differences between natural-gas storage levels and the five year average
natural-gas storage level led to lower natural gas prices.
Now I turn to an examination of the VECM estimates associated with the full and post samples
displayed in Table 7. These results should be interpreted with some care as the Johansen test failed
to reject the null hypothesis of zero cointegrating vectors between natural-gas prices and crude-oil
prices over both of these samples, as shown in Table 4 and Table 5, but I have chosen to present
them for purposes of comparison with the original Brown and Yücel (2008) results.
In the model without the exogenous covariates, the coefficients on the lagged cointegrating
terms are statistically significant at the 1% level for both the full and post samples. However, these
coefficients are much smaller in magnitude than in the original and replication samples – naturalgas prices converge to their estimated long-run relationship with crude-oil prices at a rate of approximately 1.5% per week and 2% per week in the full and post samples, respectively. However,
the Johansen procedure failed to reject the null hypothesis of zero cointegrating vectors between
natural-gas prices and crude-oil prices, so this long-run relationship is not well defined in the data.

Interestingly, when the exogenous covariates are included in the model, both the magnitude and
the statistical significance of the coefficients on the lagged cointegrating terms decreases, which
contrasts the analogous coefficients using the original and replication samples. This coefficient is
significant at the 10% level for the full sample and implies that natural-gas prices converge to the
long-run relationship with crude-oil prices at a rate of 1.2% per week, but again no statistically significant long-run relationship between natural-gas prices and crude-oil prices even exists over
this sample. The analogous coefficient for the post sample is not statistically significant. The results
of the VECM estimation over the full and post samples presented in Table 7 in conjunction with the
results of the Johansen procedure over the full and post samples presented in Tables 4 and 5 make
clear that any long-run relationship between natural-gas and crude-oil prices that existed over the
original and replication samples has since been broken – likely as a result of increased natural-gas
supply associated with the shale revolution since 2008.
Important differences between the estimated coefficients on the exogenous covariates between
the original sample period and the full and post sample periods are also apparent from inspection
of Tables 6 and 7. Deviations from normal heating degree days and deviations from cooling degree
days both had statistically significant positive impacts on natural-gas prices over the full sample period, but the magnitude of these effects is much smaller over the full sample than over the original
sample. Further, this statistical significance disappears when the model is estimated over the post
sample. This plausibly results from the increased supply of natural gas available during the postsample period: cold weather surprises have had less of an impact on natural-gas prices recently,
as future shortages resulting from current extreme weather events became less likely. Surprisingly,
the coefficient on the STORAGE DIFF variable is positive and statistically significant in both the
full and post samples, as opposed to being negative and statistically significant in the original and
replication samples.
Finally, I turn to a visual examination of the fit of the VECM model that includes the exogenous
covariates (Model 2) over the full sample. Figure 3 displays the actual Henry Hub natural-gas price
and the fitted values from Model 2 over the full sample in its top panel, and the residuals in its
bottom panel. Figure 3 is analogous to Figure 3 in Brown and Yücel (2008). Although the VECM
results over the full and post samples suggest that a long-run relationship between natural-gas
prices and crude-oil prices has not persisted during the last decade, Figure 3 shows that the VECM
model that includes exogenous covariates explains natural gas prices very well relative to simple
rules of thumb and burner-tip parity rules. In fact, the VECM appears to explain natural gas prices
after 2008 with even more accuracy than it does before 2008, when the long-run relationship with
oil was present, as the maximum magnitude of the residuals is less than $2.00 in the post sample
period, while the maximum residual in the over the original sample period is more than $5.00. Figure 3 makes clear that the VECM model continues to be useful in answering: what drives natural
gas prices?
Evidence of a better fit is buttressed by examination of the RMSE statistics for each sample period, which are displayed in the last rows of Tables 6 and 7: the RMSEs are largest in the original
sample period, before 2008, and are smallest in the post sample period, after 2008. Further, the
exogenous covariates have much less of an impact on the RMSEs in the full and post sample models.
Comparison of coefficients across Tables 6 and 7 indicate that lagged natural gas prices have come
to be the most important predictor of current natural gas prices since 2008, which again dovetails
with our earlier fining that natural gas prices have been stationary conditional on a structural break
that occurred around the summer of 2008.


Conclusion

This replication of Brown and Yücel (2008) confirms those authors’ original results that indicated
a long-run relationship between natural-gas prices and crude-oil prices existed between June 1997
and June 2007. However, when the sample period is updated to include weekly data until June
2017, this long-run relationship appears to have broken: the Johansen procedure fails to reject the
null hypothesis of zero cointegrating vectors between natural-gas prices and crude-oil prices when
the procedure is applied to the full new sample (June 1997 to June 2017) and when the procedure
is applied to the post sample (June 2007 to June 2017). On the other hand, a model that includes
the exogenous covariates that were included in the original Brown and Yücel (2008) analysis continues to explain natural-gas prices quite well.
The same year that Brown and Yücel (2008) published their highly influential analysis of the
drivers of natural gas prices the global financial crisis caused a precipitous fall in crude oil and
natural gas prices along with the prices of other commodities, as shown Figure 1. Crude oil prices
recovered relatively quickly, but natural gas prices remained depressed, and the historical relationship between crude oil prices and natural gas prices appeared to break. This replication analysis
reaffirms the relationship that Brown and Yücel (2008) discovered, but confirms that the relationship broke soon after that stusy was published. The financial crisis was likely the original cause
of the initial fall in natural gas prices, but a longer lasting trend appears to have been at play that
appears to have caused a structural shift in the trajectory of natural gas prices.
The most likely reason that the long-run relationship between natural-gas prices and crude-oil
prices broke after June 2007 was the onset of the “shale-gas revolution." Natural gas supply increased dramatically between 2005 and the present in the United States, as natural gas producers
unlocked massive quantities of gas from shale reservoirs by applying new technology. This new
supply led to dramatically lower natural gas prices, while crude-oil prices remained relatively high
until 2014. However, similar technologies are currently dramatically increasing the supply of crude
oil in the U.S. The expanded natural gas supply in the U.S. is creating increased demand for natural
gas, as more natural gas electricity generation capacity is added, liquified natural gas export facilities are built, and the petrochemical industries in the U.S. are expanded. These and other factors
will continue to make natural-gas and crude-oil markets ripe for economic analysis for years to
come.