
In recent years, the term sustainability and its use in
the context of supply chain management (SCM)
have gained considerable importance. Measuring,
improving and communicating the sustainabilityrelated performance of an organization and its SC,
has become essential for setting objectives and
determining future courses of actions. Globalization,
increasing uncertainty and scarcity of resources,
higher pressure from regulatory bodies and NGOs,
outsourcing as well as increasing consumer
awareness, are some of the significant drivers behind
the emerging focus on sustainability in SCs [14, 34,
66, 68]. Consumers are paying more attention to the
environmental quality and social conditions
associated with products and services they use. In fact,
the rise in consumer awareness has translated into a
4% increase in consumer goods sales, for the brands
committed to sustainability as compared to only 1%
for the brands that are not committed to sustainability
[54]. Further, in 2015, according to a survey
conducted by Nielsen, 66% of consumers intend to
pay more for sustainable products as compared to
55% in 2013 [54]. Organizations are increasingly
asked by stakeholders to address and manage the
social as well as the environmental issues caused by
their operations [14, 33].

KEYWORDS: Sustainable supply chain
management ∙ performance measurement ∙ content
analysis ∙ sustainability performance indicators

In spite of the increasing relevance of sustainability,
there have been few attempts in the scientific
literature to provide a quantitative framework for
evaluating the sustainability-related performance of
an organization [50, 72]. So far, there are no well-

1

1.

Hamburg University of Technology,
Institute of Business Logistics and General Management,
21073 Hamburg, Germany

established standards developed to measure the
sustainability-related performance of an organization;
instead only a limited number of sustainability
guidelines are being provided by few initiatives and
governmental agencies [45, 64, 79]. In fact, the lack
of an overarching standardized methodology as well
as the absence of an SC perspective, are the main
reasons behind the missing transparency and the
conflicting information regarding the sustainability
performance. There is an urgent and crucial need for a
standardized framework for sustainability-related
performance assessment of an organization’s SC, that
incorporates a set of recognized performance
indicators [32, 34]. Selecting the right SPIs for each
sustainability dimension, from the large but
unstructured amount of existing indicators, remains a
challenging task [11]. The aim of this paper is to
address the following research question with a help of
a multi-step approach of content analysis.
“What sustainability-related indicators for
performance assessment are disclosed in published
standards and guidelines regarding sustainability and
its associated dimensions in SC.”
It will provide a coherent and standardized set of SPIs
for the assessment of the sustainability initiatives and
their implementation. This research paper will also
provide a better understanding of the current state of
sustainability performance assessment in SCM, as
well as how it can be measured using currently
available standards and guidelines.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 presents the research background and the
state of the art in the field of SSCM and its
performance measurement. Section 3 briefly presents
the research methodology, while Section 4 provides
a detailed analysis of the results and findings.
Finally, the conclusions, strengths, and weaknesses
of the adopted research method as well as suggested
future research directions are presented in Section 5.
2.

BASIC TERMINOLOGY

The basic terminologies related to the topic of
SSCM, primary terms associated with sustainabilityrelated performance measurement, and clear
definition of SPIs are described below in detail.
2.1 Sustainable supply chain management
In the last few decades, both researchers and
practitioners have been continuously making efforts
to incorporate issues like green, social responsibility,
human rights, health and safety, etc. in the field of
SCM. The term SSCM has been discussed extensively
and includes research across the areas of responsible
SCM, ethical SCM, green SCM, as well as the
research dealing with social or environmental
impacts [22, 27, 59, 78]. Organizations are considered

 

to be responsible for their business activities that
affect the environment, society, and economy of
their own business as well as their SC participants
[71]. Therefore, any problem related to the
environmental or social dimension of sustainability at
any level in the SC could harm the focal organization
and may result in a bad reputation. On the one hand,
globalization caused SCs to expand. On the other
hand, it has raised the question of managing
sustainability issues within the conventional SC
network. Organizations from different geographic
regions of the world are culturally, politically, and
historically
different
likewise
their
social,
environmental and economic settings. Therefore,
dealing individually with such issues for an
organization’s SC has shifted to rather an integrated
and higher-order concept of sustainability in SC. A
major advancement in this field of SSCM has been
noted in the mid of 1990s [70] with a more extensive
focus to address questions like whether it is
beneficial to be sustainable and how to assess the
sustainability performance of an organization and its
SC. Therefore, it is an established fact now that an
organization’s sustainability is only possible if
sustainability issues are addressed at each level of the
SC [60].
While, there have been many attempts in research to
define SSCM, a relatively less literature is available
as compared to the literature in sustainability. Many
authors have tried to build a relationship between
conventional SC and sustainability dimensions [12,
15, 22, 60] as SSCM addresses both inter- and intraorganizational interactions and interactions among
sustainability dimensions. A number of literature
reviews on SSCM has been published in recent
years [2, 14, 15, 32, 44, 71]; nevertheless, there is
no agreement on a standardized definition of SSCM.
These literature reviews have helped to better
understand the current state of the research in this
field and the future research areas of advanced
theoretical concept development [14, 70]. The goals
of an SSCM are to provide a maximum value to all
stakeholders and to fulfill customer requirements by
achieving sustainable flows of products, services,
information, and capital as well as enabling the
cooperation among SC participants [10].
2.2 Performance measurement in SSCM
The topic of performance measurement in SCs, i.e.
to what extent the objectives are achieved, has
gained considerable attention both in academics and
practice [58]. The performance measurement helps
to increase the level of understanding and
collaboration among the SC partners and to increase
the SC wide integration [17, 51]. In the past, different
indicators were used to measure performance at
different levels in an SC [42]. Numerous traditional
SC measures such as: “customer satisfaction”,
3

 
been developed so far. However, these measures are
not sufficient to describe the performance related to
sustainable SCs as they were designed primarily for
the performance measurement of SCs in general. Until
today, researchers and practitioners are facing
challenges to develop an integrated multidimensional
framework to measure and manage SSCM,
particularly the incorporation of social dimension
into the performance measurement system (PMS)
[15, 27, 60, 71].
As mentioned above, there is a critical need to
expand the research in sustainability-related
performance measurement of SCs with suitable
performance measurement indicators. This requires
the development of a standardized and coherent list of
SPIs in order to measure the performance of
sustainable SCs. There are different guidelines and
standards that had identified the need, and provide
measures to evaluate SC performance across different
sustainability dimensions. For example, for the
environmental dimension such as ISO 14001 [38],
EMAS [20], for the social dimension such as ILO
[36], SA8000 [75], or for multiple dimensions of
sustainability such as GRI guidelines [29], UNGC's
ten principles [77].
One of the main challenges in sustainability-related
performance measurement is to adopt the right and
appropriate set of SPIs. In fact, wrongly selected
indicators can lead to a performance degradation of
an SC. An SC wide competitive advantage can only be
achieved by continuously monitoring the performance
information of SPIs from all sustainability dimensions
at regular periods. Moreover, the understandability of
SPIs to all participants is mandatory for the better SC
efficiency. Therefore, SPIs have to be designed in a
way that they can be well communicated to everyone
involved in the SC.
2.3 Sustainability performance indicators
Sustainability, as mentioned above, is a composite
approach that has combined and balanced targets in
all three sustainability dimensions. In order to assess
the sustainability-related performance of an SC, a
system of indicators is required. In literature,
substitutional terms such as ‘indicators’, ‘metrics’
and ‘measures’ are used for the performance
measurement. Neely et al. [52] have defined
performance measures as “a metric used to
quantify the efficiency and/or effectiveness of an
action”. Saisana and Tarantola [67] have defined
indicators as “pieces of information that summarize
the characteristics of a system or highlight what is
happening in a dynamic system” in order to assess the
current state of the system. Indicators are categorized
as: quantitative and qualitative [9, 73], financial and
nonfinancial [1, 23], absolute and relative [3], and
also based on their hierarchical (strategic, tactical,
operational levels) focus [17, 30]. Relatively few
publications provided a systematic analysis to
 

identify and compare indicators for the performance
measurement in sustainable SCs, and have revealed a
lesser interest in the field of developing PMS [32, 73].
Indicators can communicate the actual situation of a
complex system such as SC or sustainable SC.
Furthermore, indicators that are used to measure the
current performance of SSCM are described as
sustainability performance indicators (SPIs) in this
research work. As defined by Erol et al. [22], an SPI is
an expression used to provide information related to
the performance of an organization’s sustainability
efforts. SPIs assist in the decision-making process
within an organization engaged in sustainability.
They also help to evaluate the related efforts that an
organization has conducted to improve its
sustainability performance. A standard set of SPIs not
only provides a common foundation for both the
organization and its stakeholders but also helps them
to understand the extent of an organization’s
sustainability efforts [5]. SPIs illustrate the
magnitude and the direction of change for the
phenomena being measured [43]. Therefore, SPIs are
defined as
“Indicators that help to measure the performance of
an organization at least in
one of the three dimensions of sustainability”.
The selection of the right and balanced set of SPIs is
a critical concern and requires a systematic approach.
In terms of sustainability performance measurement,
a balanced set of indicators that covers both the
financial and non-financial aspects of performance is
required [18]. On the one hand, appropriately selected
SPIs help to assess and track an organization
sustainability performance. On the other hand, they
help
organizations
in
communicating
and
implementing their strategies at operational and
tactical levels [1]. Therefore, SPIs must be designed
carefully as they can deeply affect the organization’s
strategic, tactical and operational planning and control
if they do not convey the optimal meaning [17, 30]. In
order to better understand the problem and improve
confidence, decision-makers are required to analyze
the sustainability performance from different
viewpoints [22]. It is only possible by considering
each possible indicator for the sustainability
performance assessment.
3.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

In order to address the research question mentioned
in section 1, a content analysis approach was
selected to obtain data from existing documents and
to reduce documentary material into more pertinent
and manageable bits of data [19, 80]. A structured
steps was followed [13, 37, 63], as shown in figure 1
and explained in next subsections.
3.1 Preparation of analysis
Content analysis involves reading and rereading of a
huge amount of documents [63]. At first, a decision
was taken regarding the selection of mass media in
order to identify and collect the sample documents for
addressing the problem [19, 47, 63]. In accordance

with the research question, it was decided to restrict
this research only to sustainability-related standards
and guidelines. Furthermore, it was found that not a
wide range of standards and guidelines exist to deal
with sustainability-related issues. Therefore, every
single opportunity was availed to identify available
standards or guidelines to include in the content
analysis.

3.1 - Preparation
of analysis

Figure 1: Content analysis methodology, adapted from [13, 37, 63]
 1  Data preparation 

 

 

 

 

Identification of 
sustainability‐ 
related standards 
and guidelines 

Snowball sampling
identified 12
sustainability‐related
standards and
guidelines

Sentences and
phrases are identified
as unit of analysis 

Literature review, 
standards and 
guidelines Identified 
18 attribute 
categories 

Developing coding 
schedule and coding 
manual forcoding the 
content of documents 

3.3 - Data
Collection

3.2 - Specification
of Categories

 

 
Developing a 
database using MS‐
Excel spreadsheets for
performing analysis 

 
Assessment of the
quality of the data
and cleaning of
inconsistent and out
of range data 

The selection of the sampling technique and other
questions related to the published dates, crosscultural data, inclusion or exclusion of a particular set
of data, etc. were addressed at this step [13, 63]. For
this exploratory research, non-probability snowball
sampling technique [13, 47] was adopted.
Standards or guidelines related to at least one aspect of
sustainability and published or available in the
English language were identified and selected. The
relevance and appropriateness with the topic were
ensured by reading each of the selected standards and
guidelines in detail. The next step was to define the
unit of analysis in order to make decisions about what
to be counted and analyzed during the study. In
content analysis, words, sentences, phrases,
paragraphs, subjects or themes, dispositions, and
images can be used as a unit of analysis [13, 19, 37,
63, 80]. Therefore, sentences and phrases were used
as the unit of analysis to identify SPIs in standards
and guidelines.

 

If  necessary,  update
coding schedule  and
coding  manual  after
test run. 

Qualitative and
quantitative
assessment and
analysis of the data 

3.2 Specification of categories
At this step of the content analysis, attribute
categories
for
the
classification
and
structuring/restructuring of the content were defined.
Categories can be single, multiple, assumed or
inferred [80]. For this research, a single
categorization scheme was used in which an SPI can
relate to only one category. In addition, to increase
the validity and extract more information from the
content, both assumed and inferred categories [19,
37, 80] were used to classify units of analysis.
Assumed categories were based on the initial
literature review of scientific publications, standards,
and guidelines. Inferred categories emerged from the
research question and the data [65]. To recognize the
main impacts of an organization on each
sustainability dimension, table 1 describes attribute
5

 
Table 1: Overview of attribute categories

The environmental sustainability dimension has
attribute related to the input such as energy, water,
material, etc. and the output such as waste,
emissions, etc. In order to measure the

environmental sustainability performance of an
organization, environmental sustainability was
categorized into eight attribute categories as shown in
table 2.

Table 2: Environmental sustainability attribute categories

The identification of attribute categories in the case of
social sustainability has posed many difficulties due
to the lack of existing research in this dimension.
Social sustainability of an organization is the way in
which it manages its responsibilities towards its social

 

and human capital [25]. In order to measure the
social sustainability performance of an organization,
social sustainability was categorized into six
Table 3: Social sustainability attribute categories

Economic sustainability of an organization outlines
the distribution and flow of financial resources
among organization’s stakeholders and its impact on
the environment and the society [26]. In order to

measure the economic sustainability performance of
an organization, economic sustainability was
categorized into four attribute categories as shown in
table 4.

Table 4: Economic sustainability attribute categories

This theory based categorization scheme of assumed
and inferred categories with clear definitions has
enhanced the coding process whereas internal
validity of the findings has increased by discussion
within the research team. The content analysis
involved a process of coding [47] in which
communications from different sources were coded
systematically
using
a
defined
conceptual
methodology in order to identify the explicit

 

characteristics of the communication. Tags were
placed on units of analysis for the purpose of
assigning data in groups [13]. The degree of
inferences i.e. manifest content and latent content [13,
63] were also taken into consideration in the
classification of the content. The reliability (intercoder and intra-coder) in making inferences [53] and a
reliable coding process involved a two-step approach.
7

 
all information about the item being coded and in
step 2, a coding manual was developed that acted as a
statement of instructions for coders [13]. With a
provided set of written instructions, the coding
manual increased the consistency of the coding
process and the reliability by continuously reminding
coders about the rules for coding the data.
Later, the pilot classification was conducted to test
the comprehensiveness of the categorization
scheme and the coding process, in order to identify
any weakness in the content analysis approach [37]
as data collected may not always be classified in one
particular category. All sorts of discrepancies were
removed at this stage by revising and refining the
categories [63] and the coding manual in order to
achieve the content analysis’ goals and increase the
robustness of the coding process. The metrics of
IChemE [35] and UNGC's ten principles [77] were
selected for the test run.
3.3 Data collection and analysis
The data collection process involved the actual coding
of the content after defining the unit of analysis,
attribute categories and developing the coding
manual. It involved the collection of facts and
inferences made from the content and acted as a
truthful representation of the phenomenon under study
[37]. Afterward, data cleaning was performed to
ensure the consistency, dealing with missing values,
and for the treatment of obscurity and
inappropriateness in the collected data [37, 47]. At
this step, inconsistent and out of range data was
excluded from the final dataset [47]. The pilot
classification has
helped to remove initial
inconsistencies but a detailed quality assessment
including reliability and validity were carried out at
this step. Furthermore, reliability was ensured through
the re-coding process. In which content of standards
and guidelines were reviewed repeatedly by applying
the above seven steps of the content analysis.
Following this approach of classification, definitions
from the coding manual, pilot test, and re-coding had
ensured the stability and consistency of the research
process.
The final step in the content analysis methodology was
to analyze the data and report the results using
different quantitative and qualitative techniques in
association with the research question [63]. Statistical
techniques (e.g. descriptive statistics) were used to
present findings and produce required information
from the data. The content analysis has provided a
needed starting point for the development of a
conceptual structure and a suggested set of coherent
SPIs for measuring the performance of SSCM. The
results and findings of the content analysis are
discussed in the next section.

 

4.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The classification of SPIs has resulted in a
quantitative dataset from the qualitative content of
standards and guidelines and a spreadsheet database
was generated for further data analysis. This section
of the research paper describes the results of the
empirical data analysis in detail. It presents and
discusses the findings in a way that provides some
practical guidance for researchers and practitioners in
the field of SSCM. At first, the background
information and several descriptive features about the
selected standards and guidelines will be analyzed
and presented. Afterward, an analysis of the
identification of SPIs is given. Then the frequency
analysis of SPIs that appeared in the standards and
guidelines is provided. In subsection 4, distribution of
SPIs is discussed. Finally, subsection 5, discusses
different sustainability dimensions cited in the
standards and guidelines.
4.1 Sample and descriptive analysis
In total twelve standards and guidelines were
identified as mentioned in table 5. Out of which GRI
[29], OECD [56], and IChemE [35] are the only three
SC sustainability-related guidelines that directly
address the three dimensions of the TBL. UNGC's
ten principles [77] and ISO 26000 [40] addresses
only
two
dimensions
i.e.
environmental
sustainability and social sustainability. All of the
others address only one sustainability dimension.
The descriptive analysis reveals that the social
dimension was addressed 129 times, environmental
dimension 94 times and the economic dimension 12
times. Therefore, a total number of 235 instances of
information were identified.
As mentioned in the methodology section, each
sustainability dimension consists of different attribute
categories. After careful identification and selection,
the content of the information provided in standards
and guidelines was classified according to attribute
categories mentioned in section 3.4. This has
resulted in some variations between the original
classification (presented in the specific standards and
guidelines) and the classification proposed here for
the development of an SC sustainability performance
assessment system.
The results in table 5 represent the distribution of
identified SPIs from the selected sample as well as
their association with attribute category of the
respective sustainability dimension. A tick (✓)
symbol is used in the table if an SPI is identified for
an attribute category and cross (x) symbol is used if
there is no SPI identified for an attribute category.
Furthermore, it shows that how an attribute category
and its related SPIs were addressed by each
standard or guideline. This new formation has led to
out of twelve standards and guidelines has addressed
attribute categories of all three sustainability
dimensions whereas two standards and guidelines
have addressed attribute categories of two

sustainability dimensions and remaining five
standards and guidelines has addressed attribute
categories of only one sustainability dimension.

Table 5: Sustainability attribute categories and their relation to each standard and guideline

4.2 SPIs identification in Standards and Guidelines
In order to identify and select SPIs from standards and
guidelines, the content must have certain
characteristics. These characteristics named indicator
selection criteria, given in table 6, are based on the
review of the already published literature [9, 41, 55].
Twelve standards and guidelines were analyzed and
the proposed coding scheme helped to collect data in
the Microsoft-Excel spreadsheet. Indicators cited in
tables, figures, lists or anywhere in the text of
standards and guidelines were identified. At first,
identified instances of information were selected
based on the indicator selection criteria. If an
instance of information met the selection criteria, then
it was processed further to affiliate with attribute
categories mentioned in section 3.4.
In addition, a unique identification number was
assigned to each SPI in the coding manual. All

 

instances related to sustainability and its dimensions
were documented by using an iterative process.
Indicators with similar meanings were classified
together such as “reduction in emission”, “decrease in
the emission” or “decreasing in the emission”, etc.
During the coding process, it becomes obvious that
some instances of information were related to more
than one attribute category. In such cases, indicators
were processed using the coding schedule and the
coding manual to categorize them accurately. Each
attribute category classifies SPIs from standards and
guidelines by following data collection process
mentioned in section 3.7. The next step after collecting
general sustainability-related information from the
selected standards and guidelines is to examine
attribute categories and associated instances in
detail. The coded list of SPIs for each sustainability
9

 
Table 6: Indicator selection criteria

In the environmental sustainability dimension, three
SPIs for the ‘energy efficiency’ attribute category
were identified that define and measure the energyrelated environmental sustainability performance of
an organization. Similarly, by implementing the
content analysis methodology, six unique SPIs for
the ‘material efficiency’, six for the ‘water

management’, six for the ‘waste management’, eight
for the ‘emissions’, two for the ‘land use’, one for
the ‘environmental compliance’, and two SPIs for the
‘supplier assessment’ attribute category were
identified that define and measure the environmental
sustainability performance of an organization.

Table 7: Number of sustainability performance indicators (SPIs) identified from standards and guidelines

In the social sustainability dimension, five unique
SPIs for the ‘human rights and anti-corruption’
attribute category were identified that define and
measure the social sustainability performance of an
organization for this attribute category. Similarly, ten
unique SPIs for the ‘human resource’, three for the
‘health and safety’, four for the ‘training and
education’, three for the ‘consumer issues’, and one
for the ‘social compliance’ attribute category were
identified that define and measure the social

 

sustainability performance of an organization.
To measure the performance of the economic
dimension of SSCM, one SPI for the attribute
category of ‘stability and profitability’ was identified
in the standards and guidelines that define and
measure the economic sustainability performance of
an organization with reference to this attribute
category. Similarly, four unique SPIs for the ‘income
distribution’, two for the ‘market competitiveness’ and
attribute category were identified that define and
measure the economic sustainability performance of
an organization.
4.3 Number of SPIs’ occurrences in Standards and
Guidelines
Indicators of sustainability-related performance
measurement were identified, extracted, coded and
documented in a list of SPIs to perform frequency
analysis as shown in Figure 2. Frequency analysis
carried out to determine how often an indicator
appeared in the standards and guidelines and yielded
a higher level of understanding of the use of
identified SPIs. The frequency graph represents the
distribution of SPIs in the standards and guidelines for
each attribute category of the three sustainability
dimensions and revealed the total number of times
an attribute category was cited in the selected
sample of standards and guidelines.
For the environmental dimension of sustainability,
34 SPIs has been identified for all eight attribute
categories. These identified SPIs were cited 108
times by all standards and guidelines in the sample.
Similarly, for the social sustainability dimension, 26
SPIs were identified in the standards and guidelines
for all six attribute categories. These identified SPIs

were cited for 99 times in the whole sample.
Furthermore, for the four attribute categories of
economic sustainability dimension, 10 SPIs were
identified and these SPIs were cited 25 times in the
selected sample of the standards and guidelines as
given in table 8.
SPIs were counted as one citation per standard and
guideline for the frequency analysis. It means an SPI
citation is counted as one if an indicator has one or
more instances of information for the same indicator
in one particular standard or guideline. In some
cases, for the SPIs list, indicators were ungrouped
and in some cases for simplicity purpose same
indicators were counted twice, i.e. the same citation
was used for more than one sustainability dimension.
An example of such indicator is “compliance
category” which was counted twice in the SPIs list as
some scientific literature articles do not cite the
environmental and social compliance separately.
Furthermore, in the case of gender-specific indicators,
SPIs were developed separately for both genders in
the list with the same source of reference.
Examples of such SPIs are present in ‘human
resource’, ‘market competitiveness’ and ‘training
and
education’
attribute
category.

Figure 2: Total number of citations for each attribute category

It was revealed from the content analysis that 49% of
the identified SPIs addressed the environmental
dimension of the TBL whereas 37% addressed the
social dimension and only 14% addressed the
economic sustainability dimension of the TBL.
Furthermore, in the environmental dimension of the
TBL, ‘emissions’ attribute category is the most

 

influential in terms of a number of SPIs’ citations i.e.
22 times. In social dimension, ‘human rights and
anti-corruption’ was most the cited attribute category
i.e. 31 times and in economic dimensions, ‘income
distribution’ was the most cited attribute category i.e.
11

 

Table 8: Sustainability performance indicators’ (SPIs) frequency analysis

4.4 Distribution of SPIs in standards and
guidelines
How SPIs were coded using the content analysis
methodology and from which standard or guidelines
these were identified is shown in table 9 (see
appendix). The distribution of the whole list of SPIs
for the three sustainability dimensions with the
original source is explained in the table.
Each attribute category represents a set of SSCM
goals that an organization needs to assess in order to
manage and evaluate its sustainability performance.
For example, the goals of the ‘energy efficiency’
attribute category are the increase in the use of
renewable energy, and decrease in the use of total
energy consumption by reducing the specific energy
consumption in processes and by building more
energy efficient infrastructure. To achieve ‘energy
efficiency’ attribute category’s goals three SPIs were
identified. The first SPI of the ‘energy efficiency’
attribute category, “total annual energy consumption
of an organization” is coded as ‘E11’. Instances of
information regarding this SPI were found in UNGC
[77], ISO 14001 [38], ISO 14031 [39], GRI [29],
EMAS [20], ISO 26000 [40] and IChemE [35]. The
second
SPI for this attribute category “specific annual energy
consumption of an organization” is coded as ‘E11s’
and instances of information regarding this SPI were
found in ISO 14031 [39], GRI [29] and IChemE
[35]. The third SPI for this attribute category “total
annual renewable energy consumption of an
organization” is coded as ‘E12’ and instances of
information regarding this developed indicator were
found in ISO 14031 [39], GRI [29], EMAS [20], ISO
26000 [40] and IChemE [35] as given in table 9.
Similarly, by following this structured methodology,
the goals of the other attribute categories for three
sustainability dimensions were considered and SPIs

 

were documented, classified, and coded. In addition,
each identified SPI has specific unit and procedure for
the performance measurement. Therefore, the content
analysis methodology applied in this research has led
to a coherent and comprehensive list of quantitative
SPIs which can be used as a core list of SPIs for
future research. Furthermore, this structured and
well-defined categorization scheme can help
researchers in the field of sustainability performance
measurement in order to conduct further research
that, as well, increases the reliability of the presented
attribute categories.
4.3 Dimensions of sustainability
From the content analysis of standards and
guidelines, 70 SPIs were identified that had met the
indicator selection criteria and can be used for the
assessment of sustainability performance of an SC, as
given in table 9 (see appendix). It was revealed from
the content analysis that not all standards and
guidelines address the three sustainability dimensions
as shown in figure 3. This figure shows the internal
distribution SPIs of attribute categories of each
sustainability dimension across the selected
standards and guidelines. In the selected sample of
standards and guidelines, the environmental and
social sustainability dimensions were cited most
often. This might be due to the availability of wellestablished SPIs for the economic sustainability
dimension [44] as compared to other dimensions.
Another possibility could be the need to achieve the
same level of development for three sustainability
(environmental, social, economic) dimensions.
Furthermore, the content analysis has also revealed
that GRI (53), ISO 26000 (38), IChemE (35), ISO
14031 (26), and the UNGC's ten principles (21) are
among the top five standards and guidelines with the
Figure 3: Distribution of three sustainability dimensions across the selected standards and guidelines

5.

CONCLUSIONS

The main objective of this research article was to
conduct a detailed content analysis of standards and
guidelines in order to identify the use of
indicators for SSCM and to understand the process
of sustainability-related performance measurement. In
addition, the study aimed to assess how SPIs from
standards and guidelines are helping organizations in
the implementation and monitoring of sustainability
initiatives taken to achieve their sustainability goals.
The objectives of the study have guided to adopt a
structured content analysis approach in order to
address the research question posed at the start of this
study. Given the importance of identifying and
defining key attribute categories in the environmental,
social and economic dimensions of sustainability, this
article offers an exclusive contribution to the existing

research. At the start, 232 instances of sustainability
performance related information were identified within
twelve
standards
and
guidelines.
Precise
interpretation, restructuring, and standardizing have
led to the identification of 70 unique SPIs. 26% of
SPIs were cited only once within the sample but 30%
were cited five times or more as shown in figure 4.
These SPIs, addressed a range of core issues: for
environmental sustainability, core issues were
energy efficiency, material efficiency, water
management, waste management and emissions; for
social sustainability human rights, human resources,
health and safety, and training and education were
the core cited issues; for the economic sustainability,
market competitiveness and income distribution were
the core issues. Out of 18 key attribute categories, the
most represented attribute categories were emissions
and human resource, which were cited in 9% and
13% respectively in the sample.

Figure 4: Frequency of citation for each SPI
7
10%
6
14

1
26%

5 
6
4
9%
3
14%

 

2
13

 
5.1 Contribution to sustainability performance
assessment of supply chains
This research paper provides a comprehensive
content analysis of SPIs in the SSCM context. To
the best of authors’ knowledge, no similar study has
been conducted that analyzed SPIs from the
sustainability-related standards and guidelines. The
content analysis methodology explained in this
research article can additionally serve as an
example for future research in the field of SSCM.
This study has revealed a clear lack of well-defined
scope, span, and definitions of sustainability attribute
categories, despite the efforts made in the scientific
literature to define attribute categories. The
systematic and structured approach of selecting
assumed and inferred attribute categories from the
scientific literature as well as from the standards
and guidelines has helped to minimize the research
gap and to prepare the ground for further theory
research building in SSCM. Furthermore, the
comprehensive attribute categories definitions have
helped to overcome major weaknesses in the previous
research regarding attribute categories of each
sustainability dimension.
This research paper has numerous implications for
SPIs and the assessment of the sustainabilityrelated performance of an organization and its SC. On
the one hand, it has helped to identify SPIs for the
measurement of sustainability-related performance of
an organization. On the other hand, it has provided a
unified approach to sustainability assessment in terms
of attribute categories for the three sustainability
dimensions. According to the TBL, a concept of
attribute categories was structurally built from the

analyzed literature and the published standards and
guidelines for measuring the sustainability-related
performance of SCs. The proposed attribute categories
help to consolidate SPIs published in different
standards and guidelines. These consolidated SPIs can
be used across all functions of SSCM and provide a
reasonable base to compare and evaluate different
SCs or different participants of an SC. Additionally,
the proposed list of SPIs has provided a solid
foundation for quantitatively measuring
the
performance of an organization.
Furthermore, a conceptual framework, based on the
identified list of SPIs in this research paper, to
assess the sustainability performance of supply chains
is proposed that can help in evaluating the
sustainability performance of a supply chain at five
hierarchical levels as shown in figure 5. At first, the
performance is measured at the performance
indicators’ level. The performance scores at the
indicators’ level are aggregated to the next
hierarchical level represented by the sustainability
attribute categories. In order to assess the
performance at each sustainability dimension, the
performance scores of attribute categories for a
particular sustainability dimension are aggregated.
The aggregated performance scores of each
sustainability dimension enable the evaluation of
sustainability performance at the supply chain
participants’ level. The sustainability performance
scores of each supply chain participant are aggregated
to evaluate the sustainability performance of the
uppermost hierarchical level i.e. the overall supply
chain sustainability performance.

Figure 5: Supply Chain Sustainability Performance Measurement

5.2 Limitations and future research
Certainly, many improvements and specifications can
be added to this frame of reference. It should be noted
that only international standards and guidelines,
available in the English language, were considered for
the purpose of this research work but employing more
standards and guidelines from different geographical
areas and languages might have some different
effects on the results. Despite this limitation, the
study has provided a clear list of SPIs for key attribute
categories and provides a strong basis for the
implications to measure the sustainability-related
performance of an organization and associated SC. To
the best of authors’ knowledge, no previous research in
analyzing standards and guidelines for SSCM in
detail has been identified. Therefore, considering a
sample of twelve standards and guidelines for this
research purpose is justified.
The content analysis approach is applied due to its
significance, but the research can be expanded by
implementing other research analysis techniques.
Another limitation of this research is the sample
selection methodology. Other sample selection
methodologies, apart from snowball sampling, might
lead to a different set of standards and guidelines.
One of very important future research direction
would be to identify and analyze SPIs from other
sources of mass media such as books, peer-reviewed

6.

APPENDIX

Table 9 Distribution of sustainability performance indicators

 
 

scientific articles, conference papers, magazines, etc.
It will help to understand the current state of literature
by cross-referencing it to the results of this study.
Furthermore, it can help to develop a unified list of
SPIs that can assess the composite performance of an
SC for each sustainability dimension. This can lead
to a standardized approach for assessing
sustainability by developing a sustainability-related
PMS for SC.
In accordance with the results of this study, there is a
need to emphasize especially on the social
sustainability dimension from the stage of indicators
development to the stage of development of a PMS.
In addition, interrelation among all three sustainability
dimensions and how it can be established, and the
need for cross-cutting SPIs are a future area of
research. The current list of SPIs developed in this
research has provided the possibility to upgrade, after
a successful research and development of new
multidimensional indicators. On the one hand, it could
help the organization to expand their focus on
achieving interconnectedness among sustainability
dimensions. On the other hand, it will provide the
opportunity of managing different issues among
sustainability dimensions. Future research in these
directions will help to further enhance and
standardize the process of performance measurement